![](media/rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.57in"}

Figure 1.1 Do You Use Facebook? Economics is greatly impacted by how
well information travels through society. Today, social media giants
Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram are major forces on the information
super highway. (Credit: modification of \"Social Media Mixed Icons -
Banner\" by Blogtrepreneur/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   What Is Economics, and Why Is It Important?
-   Microeconomics and Macroeconomics
-   How Economists Use Theories and Models to Understand Economic Issues
-   How Economies Can Be Organized: An Overview of Economic Systems

## Introduction

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Information Overload in the Information Age {#information-overload-in-the-information-age .Heading4Grey}

To post or not to post? Every day we are faced with a myriad of
decisions, from what to have for breakfast, to which show to stream, to
the more complex---"Should I double major and add possibly another
semester of study to my education?" Our response to these choices
depends on the information we have available at any given moment.
Economists call this "imperfect" because we rarely have all the data we
need to make perfect decisions. Despite the lack of perfect information,
we still make hundreds of decisions a day.

Streams, sponsors, and social media are altering the process by which we
make choices, how we spend our time, which movies we see, which products
we buy, and more. Whether they read the reviews or just check the
ratings, it\'s unlikely for Americans to make many significant decisions
without these information streams.

As you will see in this course, what happens in economics is affected by
how well and how fast information disseminates through a society, such
as how quickly information travels through Facebook. "Economists love
nothing better than when deep and liquid markets operate under
conditions of perfect information," says Jessica Irvine, National
Economics Editor for News Corp Australia.

This leads us to the topic of this chapter, an introduction to the world
of making decisions, processing information, and understanding behavior
in markets ---the world of economics. Each chapter in this book will
start with a discussion about current (or sometimes past) events and
revisit it at chapter's end---to "bring home" the concepts in play.

What is economics and why should you spend your time learning it? After
all, there are other disciplines you could be studying, and other ways
you could be spending your time. As the Bring it Home feature just
mentioned, making choices is at the heart of what economists study, and
your decision to take this course is as much as economic decision as
anything else.

Economics is probably not what you think. It is not primarily about
money or finance. It is not primarily about business. It is not
mathematics. What is it then? It is both a subject area and a way of
viewing the world.
