## 10.1 Monopolistic Competition

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the significance of differentiated products
-   Describe how a monopolistic competitor chooses price and quantity
-   Discuss entry, exit, and efficiency as they pertain to monopolistic
    competition
-   Analyze how advertising can impact monopolistic competition

Monopolistic competition involves many firms competing against each
other, but selling products that are distinctive in some way. Examples
include stores that sell different styles of clothing; restaurants or
grocery stores that sell a variety of food; and even products like golf
balls or beer that may be at least somewhat similar but differ in public
perception because of advertising and brand names. There are over
600,000 restaurants in the United States. When products are distinctive,
each firm has a mini-monopoly on its particular style or flavor or brand
name. However, firms producing such products must also compete with
other styles and flavors and brand names. The term "monopolistic
competition" captures this mixture of mini-monopoly and tough
competition, and the following Clear It Up feature introduces its
derivation.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### Who invented the theory of imperfect competition? {#who-invented-the-theory-of-imperfect-competition .Heading4Grey}

Two economists independently but simultaneously developed the theory of
imperfect competition in 1933. The first was Edward Chamberlin of
Harvard University who published *The Economics of Monopolistic
Competition*. The second was Joan Robinson of Cambridge University who
published *The Economics of Imperfect Competition*. Robinson
subsequently became interested in macroeconomics and she became a
prominent Keynesian, and later a post-Keynesian economist. (See the
[Welcome to
Economics!](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-introduction)
and [The Keynesian
Perspective](http://openstax.org/books/principles-economics-3e/pages/25-introduction-to-the-keynesian-perspective)
chapters for more on Keynes.)

### Differentiated Products

A firm can try to make its products different from those of its
competitors in several ways: physical aspects of the product, location
from which it sells the product, intangible aspects of the product, and
perceptions of the product. We call products that are distinctive in one
of these ways differentiated products.

Physical aspects of a product include all the phrases you hear in
advertisements: unbreakable bottle, nonstick surface,
freezer-to-microwave, non-shrink, extra spicy, newly redesigned for your
comfort. A firm\'s location can also create a difference between
producers. For example, a gas station located at a heavily traveled
intersection can probably sell more gas, because more cars drive by that
corner. A supplier to an automobile manufacturer may find that it is an
advantage to locate close to the car factory.

Intangible aspects can differentiate a product, too. Some intangible
aspects may be promises like a guarantee of satisfaction or money back,
a reputation for high quality, services like free delivery, or offering
a loan to purchase the product. Finally, product differentiation may
occur in the minds of buyers. For example, many people could not tell
the difference in taste between common varieties of ketchup or
mayonnaise if they were blindfolded but, because of past habits and
advertising, they have strong preferences for certain brands.
Advertising can play a role in shaping these intangible preferences.

The concept of differentiated products is closely related to the degree
of variety that is available. If everyone in the economy wore only blue
jeans, ate only white bread, and drank only tap water, then the markets
for clothing, food, and drink would be much closer to perfectly
competitive. The variety of styles, flavors, locations, and
characteristics creates product differentiation and monopolistic
competition.

### Perceived Demand for a Monopolistic Competitor

A monopolistically competitive firm perceives a demand for its goods
that is an intermediate case between monopoly and competition. [Figure
10.2](#CNX_Econ_C10_008) offers a reminder that the demand curve that a
perfectly competitive firm faces is perfectly elastic or flat, because
the perfectly competitive firm can sell any quantity it wishes at the
prevailing market price. In contrast, the demand curve, as faced by a
monopolist, is the market demand curve, since a monopolist is the only
firm in the market, and hence is downward sloping.

![](media/rId33.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.305in"}

Figure 10.2 Perceived Demand for Firms in Different Competitive Settings
The demand curve that a perfectly competitive firm faces is perfectly
elastic, meaning it can sell all the output it wishes at the prevailing
market price. The demand curve that a monopoly faces is the market
demand. It can sell more output only by decreasing the price it charges.
The demand curve that a monopolistically competitive firm faces falls in
between.

The demand curve as a monopolistic competitor faces is not flat, but
rather downward-sloping, which means that the monopolistic competitor
can raise its price without losing all of its customers or lower the
price and gain more customers. Since there are substitutes, the demand
curve facing a monopolistically competitive firm is more elastic than
that of a monopoly where there are no close substitutes. If a monopolist
raises its price, some consumers will choose not to purchase its
product---but they will then need to buy a completely different product.
However, when a monopolistic competitor raises its price, some consumers
will choose not to purchase the product at all, but others will choose
to buy a similar product from another firm. If a monopolistic competitor
raises its price, it will not lose as many customers as would a
perfectly competitive firm, but it will lose more customers than would a
monopoly that raised its prices.

At a glance, the demand curves that a monopoly and a monopolistic
competitor face look similar---that is, they both slope down. However,
the underlying economic meaning of these perceived demand curves is
different, because a monopolist faces the market demand curve and a
monopolistic competitor does not. Rather, a monopolistically competitive
firm's demand curve is but one of many firms that make up the "before"
market demand curve. Are you following? If so, how would you categorize
the market for golf balls? Take a swing, then see the following Clear It
Up feature.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-1 .Heading3Grey}

#### Are golf balls really differentiated products? {#are-golf-balls-really-differentiated-products .Heading4Grey}

Monopolistic competition refers to an industry that has more than a few
firms, each offering a product which, from the consumer's perspective,
is different from its competitors. The U.S. Golf Association runs a
laboratory that tests 20,000 golf balls a year. There are strict rules
for what makes a golf ball legal. A ball\'s weight cannot exceed 1.620
ounces and its diameter cannot be less than 1.680 inches (which is a
weight of 45.93 grams and a diameter of 42.67 millimeters, in case you
were wondering). The Association also tests the balls by hitting them at
different speeds. For example, the distance test involves having a
mechanical golfer hit the ball with a titanium driver and a swing speed
of 120 miles per hour. As the testing center explains: "The USGA system
then uses an array of sensors that accurately measure the flight of a
golf ball during a short, indoor trajectory from a ball launcher. From
this flight data, a computer calculates the lift and drag forces that
are generated by the speed, spin, and dimple pattern of the ball. \...
The distance limit is 317 yards."

Over 1800 golf balls made by more than 100 companies meet the USGA
standards. The balls do differ in various ways, such as the pattern of
dimples on the ball, the types of plastic on the cover and in the cores,
and other factors. Since all balls need to conform to the USGA tests,
they are much more alike than different. In other words, golf ball
manufacturers are monopolistically competitive.

However, retail sales of golf balls are about \$500 million per year,
which means that many large companies have a powerful incentive to
persuade players that golf balls are highly differentiated and that it
makes a huge difference which one you choose. Sure, Tiger Woods can tell
the difference. For the average amateur golfer who plays a few times a
summer---and who loses many golf balls to the woods and lake and needs
to buy new ones---most golf balls are pretty much indistinguishable.

### How a Monopolistic Competitor Chooses Price and Quantity

The monopolistically competitive firm decides on its profit-maximizing
quantity and price in much the same way as a monopolist. A monopolistic
competitor, like a monopolist, faces a downward-sloping demand curve,
and so it will choose some combination of price and quantity along its
perceived demand curve.

As an example of a profit-maximizing monopolistic competitor, consider
the Authentic Chinese Pizza store, which serves pizza with cheese, sweet
and sour sauce, and your choice of vegetables and meats. Although
Authentic Chinese Pizza must compete against other pizza businesses and
restaurants, it has a differentiated product. The firm's perceived
demand curve is downward sloping, as [Figure 10.3](#CNX_Econ_C10_004)
shows and the first two columns of [Table 10.1](#Table_10_01).

![](media/rId40.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.755in"}

Figure 10.3 How a Monopolistic Competitor Chooses its Profit Maximizing
Output and Price To maximize profits, the Authentic Chinese Pizza shop
would choose a quantity where marginal revenue equals marginal cost, or
Q where MR = MC. Here it would choose a quantity of 40 and a price of
\$16.

Table 10.1 Revenue and Cost Schedule

We can multiply the combinations of price and quantity at each point on
the demand curve to calculate the total revenue that the firm would
receive, which is in the third column of [Table 10.1](#Table_10_01). We
calculate marginal revenue, in the fourth column, as the change in total
revenue divided by the change in quantity. The final columns of [Table
10.1](#Table_10_01) show total cost, marginal cost, and average cost. As
always, we calculate marginal cost by dividing the change in total cost
by the change in quantity, while we calculate average cost by dividing
total cost by quantity. The following Work It Out feature shows how
these firms calculate how much of their products to supply at what
price.

### Work It Out {#work-it-out .Heading3Grey}

#### How a Monopolistic Competitor Determines How Much to Produce and at What Price {#how-a-monopolistic-competitor-determines-how-much-to-produce-and-at-what-price .Heading4Grey}

The process by which a monopolistic competitor chooses its
profit-maximizing quantity and price resembles closely how a monopoly
makes these decisions process. First, the firm selects the
profit-maximizing quantity to produce. Then the firm decides what price
to charge for that quantity.

Step 1. The monopolistic competitor determines its profit-maximizing
level of output. In this case, the Authentic Chinese Pizza company will
determine the profit-maximizing quantity to produce by considering its
marginal revenues and marginal costs. Two scenarios are possible:

-   If the firm is producing at a quantity of output where marginal
    revenue exceeds marginal cost, then the firm should keep expanding
    production, because each marginal unit is adding to profit by
    bringing in more revenue than its cost. In this way, the firm will
    produce up to the quantity where MR = MC.
-   If the firm is producing at a quantity where marginal costs exceed
    marginal revenue, then each marginal unit is costing more than the
    revenue it brings in, and the firm will increase its profits by
    reducing the quantity of output until MR = MC.

In this example, MR and MC intersect at a quantity of 40, which is the
profit-maximizing level of output for the firm.

Step 2. The monopolistic competitor decides what price to charge. When
the firm has determined its profit-maximizing quantity of output, it can
then look to its perceived demand curve to find out what it can charge
for that quantity of output. On the graph, we show this process as a
vertical line reaching up through the profit-maximizing quantity until
it hits the firm's perceived demand curve. For Authentic Chinese Pizza,
it should charge a price of \$16 per pizza for a quantity of 40.

Once the firm has chosen price and quantity, it's in a position to
calculate total revenue, total cost, and profit. At a quantity of 40,
the price of \$16 lies above the average cost curve, so the firm is
making economic profits. From [Table 10.1](#Table_10_01) we can see
that, at an output of 40, the firm's total revenue is \$640 and its
total cost is \$580, so profits are \$60. In [Figure
10.3](#CNX_Econ_C10_004), the firm's total revenues are the rectangle
with the quantity of 40 on the horizontal axis and the price of \$16 on
the vertical axis. The firm's total costs are the light shaded rectangle
with the same quantity of 40 on the horizontal axis but the average cost
of \$14.50 on the vertical axis. Profits are total revenues minus total
costs, which is the shaded area above the average cost curve.

Although the process by which a monopolistic competitor makes decisions
about quantity and price is similar to the way in which a monopolist
makes such decisions, two differences are worth remembering. First,
although both a monopolist and a monopolistic competitor face
downward-sloping demand curves, the monopolist's perceived demand curve
is the market demand curve, while the perceived demand curve for a
monopolistic competitor is based on the extent of its product
differentiation and how many competitors it faces. Second, a monopolist
is surrounded by barriers to entry and need not fear entry, but a
monopolistic competitor who earns profits must expect the entry of firms
with similar, but differentiated, products.

### Monopolistic Competitors and Entry

If one monopolistic competitor earns positive economic profits, other
firms will be tempted to enter the market. A gas station with a great
location must worry that other gas stations might open across the street
or down the road---and perhaps the new gas stations will sell coffee or
have a carwash or some other attraction to lure customers. A successful
restaurant with a unique barbecue sauce must be concerned that other
restaurants will try to copy the sauce or offer their own unique
recipes. A laundry detergent with a great reputation for quality must
take note that other competitors may seek to build their own
reputations.

The entry of other firms into the same general market (like gas,
restaurants, or detergent) shifts the demand curve that a
monopolistically competitive firm faces. As more firms enter the market,
the quantity demanded at a given price for any particular firm will
decline, and the firm's perceived demand curve will shift to the left.
As a firm's perceived demand curve shifts to the left, its marginal
revenue curve will shift to the left, too. The shift in marginal revenue
will change the profit-maximizing quantity that the firm chooses to
produce, since marginal revenue will then equal marginal cost at a lower
quantity.

[Figure 10.4](#CNX_Econ_C10_009) (a) shows a situation in which a
monopolistic competitor was earning a profit with its original perceived
demand curve (D~0~). The intersection of the marginal revenue curve
(MR~0~) and marginal cost curve (MC) occurs at point S, corresponding to
quantity Q~0~, which is associated on the demand curve at point T with
price P~0~. The combination of price P~0~ and quantity Q~0~ lies above
the average cost curve, which shows that the firm is earning positive
economic profits.

![](media/rId47.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.68in"}

Figure 10.4 Monopolistic Competition, Entry, and Exit (a) At P~0~ and
Q~0~, the monopolistically competitive firm in this figure is making a
positive economic profit. This is clear because if you follow the dotted
line above Q~0~, you can see that price is above average cost. Positive
economic profits attract competing firms to the industry, driving the
original firm's demand down to D~1~. At the new equilibrium quantity
(P~1~, Q~1~), the original firm is earning zero economic profits, and
entry into the industry ceases. In (b) the opposite occurs. At P~0~ and
Q~0~, the firm is losing money. If you follow the dotted line above
Q~0~, you can see that average cost is above price. Losses induce firms
to leave the industry. When they do, demand for the original firm rises
to D~1~, where once again the firm is earning zero economic profit.

Unlike a monopoly, with its high barriers to entry, a monopolistically
competitive firm with positive economic profits will attract
competition. When another competitor enters the market, the original
firm's perceived demand curve shifts to the left, from D~0~ to D~1~, and
the associated marginal revenue curve shifts from MR~0~ to MR~1~. The
new profit-maximizing output is Q~1~, because the intersection of the
MR~1~ and MC now occurs at point U. Moving vertically up from that
quantity on the new demand curve, the optimal price is at P~1~.

As long as the firm is earning positive economic profits, new
competitors will continue to enter the market, reducing the original
firm's demand and marginal revenue curves. The long-run equilibrium is
in the figure at point Y, where the firm's perceived demand curve
touches the average cost curve. When price is equal to average cost,
economic profits are zero. Thus, although a monopolistically competitive
firm may earn positive economic profits in the short term, the process
of new entry will drive down economic profits to zero in the long run.
Remember that zero economic profit is not equivalent to zero accounting
profit. A zero economic profit means the firm's accounting profit is
equal to what its resources could earn in their next best use. [Figure
10.4](#CNX_Econ_C10_009) (b) shows the reverse situation, where a
monopolistically competitive firm is originally losing money. The
adjustment to long-run equilibrium is analogous to the previous example.
The economic losses lead to firms exiting, which will result in
increased demand for this particular firm, and consequently lower
losses. Firms exit up to the point where there are no more losses in
this market, for example when the demand curve touches the average cost
curve, as in point Z.

Monopolistic competitors can make an economic profit or loss in the
short run, but in the long run, entry and exit will drive these firms
toward a zero economic profit outcome. However, the zero economic profit
outcome in monopolistic competition looks different from the zero
economic profit outcome in perfect competition in several ways relating
both to efficiency and to variety in the market.

### Monopolistic Competition and Efficiency

The long-term result of entry and exit in a perfectly competitive market
is that all firms end up selling at the price level determined by the
lowest point on the average cost curve. This outcome is why perfect
competition displays productive efficiency: goods are produced at the
lowest possible average cost. However, in monopolistic competition, the
end result of entry and exit is that firms end up with a price that lies
on the downward-sloping portion of the average cost curve, not at the
very bottom of the AC curve. Thus, monopolistic competition will not be
productively efficient.

In a perfectly competitive market, each firm produces at a quantity
where price is set equal to marginal cost, both in the short and long
run. This outcome is why perfect competition displays allocative
efficiency: the social benefits of additional production, as measured by
the marginal benefit, which is the same as the price, equal the marginal
costs to society of that production. In a monopolistically competitive
market, the rule for maximizing profit is to set MR = MC---and price is
higher than marginal revenue, not equal to it because the demand curve
is downward sloping. When P \> MC, which is the outcome in a
monopolistically competitive market, the benefits to society of
providing additional quantity, as measured by the price that people are
willing to pay, exceed the marginal costs to society of producing those
units. A monopolistically competitive firm does not produce more, which
means that society loses the net benefit of those extra units. This is
the same argument we made about monopoly, but in this case the
allocative inefficiency will be smaller. Thus, a monopolistically
competitive industry will produce a lower quantity of a good and charge
a higher price for it than would a perfectly competitive industry. See
the following Clear It Up feature for more detail on the impact of
demand shifts.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-2 .Heading3Grey}

#### Why does a shift in perceived demand cause a shift in marginal revenue? {#why-does-a-shift-in-perceived-demand-cause-a-shift-in-marginal-revenue .Heading4Grey}

We use the combinations of price and quantity at each point on a firm's
perceived demand curve to calculate total revenue for each combination
of price and quantity. We then use this information on total revenue to
calculate marginal revenue, which is the change in total revenue divided
by the change in quantity. A change in perceived demand will change
total revenue at every quantity of output and in turn, the change in
total revenue will shift marginal revenue at each quantity of output.
Thus, when entry occurs in a monopolistically competitive industry, the
perceived demand curve for each firm will shift to the left, because a
smaller quantity will be demanded at any given price. Another way of
interpreting this shift in demand is to notice that, for each quantity
sold, the firm will charge a lower price. Consequently, the marginal
revenue will be lower for each quantity sold---and the marginal revenue
curve will shift to the left as well. Conversely, exit causes the
perceived demand curve for a monopolistically competitive firm to shift
to the right and the corresponding marginal revenue curve to shift
right, too.

A monopolistically competitive industry does not display productive or
allocative efficiency in either the short run, when firms are making
economic profits and losses, nor in the long run, when firms are earning
zero profits.

### The Benefits of Variety and Product Differentiation

Even though monopolistic competition does not provide productive
efficiency or allocative efficiency, it does have benefits of its own.
Product differentiation is based on variety and innovation. Most people
would prefer to live in an economy with many kinds of clothes, foods,
and car styles; not in a world of perfect competition where everyone
will always wear blue jeans and white shirts, eat only spaghetti with
plain red sauce, and drive an identical model of car. Most people would
prefer to live in an economy where firms are struggling to figure out
ways of attracting customers by methods like friendlier service, free
delivery, guarantees of quality, variations on existing products, and a
better shopping experience.

Economists have struggled, with only partial success, to address the
question of whether a market-oriented economy produces the optimal
amount of variety. Critics of market-oriented economies argue that
society does not really need dozens of different athletic shoes or
breakfast cereals or automobiles. They argue that much of the cost of
creating such a high degree of product differentiation, and then of
advertising and marketing this differentiation, is socially
wasteful---that is, most people would be just as happy with a smaller
range of differentiated products produced and sold at a lower price.
Defenders of a market-oriented economy respond that if people do not
want to buy differentiated products or highly advertised brand names, no
one is forcing them to do so. Moreover, they argue that consumers
benefit substantially when firms seek short-term profits by providing
differentiated products. This controversy may never be fully resolved,
in part because deciding on the optimal amount of variety is very
difficult, and in part because the two sides often place different
values on what variety means for consumers. Read the following Clear It
Up feature for a discussion on the role that advertising plays in
monopolistic competition.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-3 .Heading3Grey}

#### How does advertising impact monopolistic competition? {#how-does-advertising-impact-monopolistic-competition .Heading4Grey}

The U.S. economy spent about \$180.12 billion on advertising in 2014,
according to eMarketer.com. Roughly one third of this was television
advertising, and another third was divided roughly equally between
internet, newspapers, and radio. The remaining third was divided between
direct mail, magazines, telephone directory yellow pages, and
billboards. Mobile devices are increasing the opportunities for
advertisers.

Advertising is all about explaining to people, or making people believe,
that the products of one firm are differentiated from another firm\'s
products. In the framework of monopolistic competition, there are two
ways to conceive of how advertising works: either advertising causes a
firm's perceived demand curve to become more inelastic (that is, it
causes the perceived demand curve to become steeper); or advertising
causes demand for the firm's product to increase (that is, it causes the
firm's perceived demand curve to shift to the right). In either case, a
successful advertising campaign may allow a firm to sell either a
greater quantity or to charge a higher price, or both, and thus increase
its profits.

However, economists and business owners have also long suspected that
much of the advertising may only offset other advertising. Economist A.
C. Pigou wrote the following back in 1920 in his book, *The Economics of
Welfare*:

> It may happen that expenditures on advertisement made by competing
> monopolists \[that is, what we now call monopolistic competitors\]
> will simply neutralise one another, and leave the industrial position
> exactly as it would have been if neither had expended anything. For,
> clearly, if each of two rivals makes equal efforts to attract the
> favour of the public away from the other, the total result is the same
> as it would have been if neither had made any effort at all.
