![](media/rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="4.116666666666666in"}

Figure 10.1 Competing Brands? The laundry detergent market is one that
is characterized neither as perfect competition nor monopoly. (Credit:
modification of "DSC_7174" by Pixel Drip/Flickr Creative Commons, CC BY
2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   Monopolistic Competition
-   Oligopoly

## Introduction to Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### The Temptation to Defy the Law {#the-temptation-to-defy-the-law .Heading4Grey}

Laundry detergent and bags of ice---products of industries that seem
pretty mundane, maybe even boring. Hardly! Both have been the center of
clandestine meetings and secret deals worthy of a spy novel. In France,
between 1997 and 2004, the top four laundry detergent producers (Proctor
& Gamble, Henkel, Unilever, and Colgate-Palmolive) controlled about 90
percent of the French soap market. Officials from the soap firms were
meeting secretly, in out-of-the-way, small caf√©s around Paris. Their
goals: Stamp out competition and set prices.

Around the same time, the top five Midwest ice makers (Home City Ice,
Lang Ice, Tinley Ice, Sisler's Dairy, and Products of Ohio) had similar
goals in mind when they secretly agreed to divide up the bagged ice
market.

If both groups could meet their goals, it would enable each to act as
though they were a single firm---in essence, a monopoly---and enjoy
monopoly-size profits. The problem? In many parts of the world,
including the European Union and the United States, it is illegal for
firms to divide markets and set prices collaboratively.

These two cases provide examples of markets that are characterized
neither as perfect competition nor monopoly. Instead, these firms are
competing in market structures that lie between the extremes of monopoly
and perfect competition. How do they behave? Why do they exist? We will
revisit this case later, to find out what happened.

Perfect competition and monopoly are at opposite ends of the competition
spectrum. A perfectly competitive market has many firms selling
identical products, who all act as price takers in the face of the
competition. If you recall, price takers are firms that have no market
power. They simply have to take the market price as given.

Monopoly arises when a single firm sells a product for which there are
no close substitutes. We consider Microsoft, for instance, as a monopoly
because it dominates the operating systems market.

What about the vast majority of real world firms and organizations that
fall between these extremes, firms that we could describe as imperfectly
competitive? What determines their behavior? They have more influence
over the price they charge than perfectly competitive firms, but not as
much as a monopoly. What will they do?

One type of imperfectly competitive market is monopolistic competition.
Monopolistically competitive markets feature a large number of competing
firms, but the products that they sell are not identical. Consider, as
an example, the Mall of America in Minnesota, the largest shopping mall
in the United States. In 2010, the Mall of America had 24 stores that
sold women's "ready-to-wear" clothing (like Ann Taylor and Urban
Outfitters), another 50 stores that sold clothing for both men and women
(like Banana Republic, J. Crew, and Nordstrom's), plus 14 more stores
that sold women's specialty clothing (like Motherhood Maternity and
Victoria's Secret). Most of the markets that consumers encounter at the
retail level are monopolistically competitive.

The other type of imperfectly competitive market is oligopoly.
Oligopolistic markets are those which a small number of firms dominate.
Commercial aircraft provides a good example: Boeing and Airbus each
produce slightly less than 50% of the large commercial aircraft in the
world. Another example is the U.S. soft drink industry, which Coca-Cola
and Pepsi dominate. We characterize oligopolies by high barriers to
entry with firms choosing output, pricing, and other decisions
strategically based on the decisions of the other firms in the market.
In this chapter, we first explore how monopolistically competitive firms
will choose their profit-maximizing level of output. We will then
discuss oligopolistic firms, which face two conflicting temptations: to
collaborate as if they were a single monopoly, or to individually
compete to gain profits by expanding output levels and cutting prices.
Oligopolistic markets and firms can also take on elements of monopoly
and of perfect competition.
