## Key Concepts and Summary

### 10.1 Monopolistic Competition

Monopolistic competition refers to a market where many firms sell
differentiated products. Differentiated products can arise from
characteristics of the good or service, location from which the firm
sells the product, intangible aspects of the product, and perceptions of
the product.

The perceived demand curve for a monopolistically competitive firm is
downward-sloping, which shows that it is a price maker and chooses a
combination of price and quantity. However, the perceived demand curve
for a monopolistic competitor is more elastic than the perceived demand
curve for a monopolist, because the monopolistic competitor has direct
competition, unlike the pure monopolist. A profit-maximizing
monopolistic competitor will seek out the quantity where marginal
revenue is equal to marginal cost. The monopolistic competitor will
produce that level of output and charge the price that the firm's demand
curve indicates.

If the firms in a monopolistically competitive industry are earning
economic profits, the industry will attract entry until profits are
driven down to zero in the long run. If the firms in a monopolistically
competitive industry are suffering economic losses, then the industry
will experience exit of firms until economic losses are driven up to
zero in the long run.

A monopolistically competitive firm is not productively efficient
because it does not produce at the minimum of its average cost curve. A
monopolistically competitive firm is not allocatively efficient because
it does not produce where P = MC, but instead produces where P \> MC.
Thus, a monopolistically competitive firm will tend to produce a lower
quantity at a higher cost and to charge a higher price than a perfectly
competitive firm.

Monopolistically competitive industries do offer benefits to consumers
in the form of greater variety and incentives for improved products and
services. There is some controversy over whether a market-oriented
economy generates too much variety.

### 10.2 Oligopoly

An oligopoly is a situation where a few firms sell most or all of the
goods in a market. Oligopolists earn their highest profits if they can
band together as a cartel and act like a monopolist by reducing output
and raising price. Since each member of the oligopoly can benefit
individually from expanding output, such collusion often breaks
down---especially since explicit collusion is illegal.

The prisoner's dilemma is an example of the application of game theory
to analysis of oligopoly. It shows how, in certain situations, all sides
can benefit from cooperative behavior rather than self-interested
behavior. However, the challenge for the parties is to find ways to
encourage cooperative behavior.
