## 11.1 Corporate Mergers

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain antitrust law and its significance
-   Calculate concentration ratios
-   Calculate the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
-   Evaluate methods of antitrust regulation

A corporate merger occurs when two formerly separate firms combine to
become a single firm. When one firm purchases another, it is called an
acquisition. An acquisition may not look just like a merger, since the
newly purchased firm may continue to operate under its former company
name. Mergers can also be lateral, where two firms of similar sizes
combine to become one. However, both mergers and acquisitions lead to
two formerly separate firms operating under common ownership, and so
they are commonly grouped together.

### Regulations for Approving Mergers

Since a merger combines two firms into one, it can reduce the extent of
competition between firms. Therefore, when two U.S. firms announce a
merger or acquisition where at least one of the firms is above a minimum
size of sales (a threshold that moves up gradually over time, and was at
\$101 million in 2022), or certain other conditions are met, they are
required under law to notify the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
The left-hand panel of [Figure 11.2](#CNX_Econ_C11_004) (a) shows the
number of mergers submitted for review to the FTC each year from 1999 to
2012. Mergers follow the business cycle, falling after the 2001
recession, peaking in 2007 as the Great Recession struck, and then
rising since 2009. The right-hand panel of [Figure
11.2](#CNX_Econ_C11_004) (b) shows the distribution of those mergers
submitted for review in 2015 as measured by the size of the transaction.
It is important to remember that this total leaves out many small
mergers under \$50 million, which companies only need to report in
certain limited circumstances. In 2012, 26 percent of all reported
merger and acquisition transactions exceeded \$500 million, while 11
percent exceeded \$1 billion.

![](media/rId24.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.827823709536308in"}

Figure 11.2 Number and Size of Mergers (a) The number of mergers grew
from 2003 to 2007, then fell dramatically during the 2008-2009 Great
Recession, before recovering since. (b) In 2012, the greatest number of
mergers submitted for review by the Federal Trade Commission was for
transactions between \$100--\$150 million.

The laws that give government the power to block certain mergers, and
even in some cases to break up large firms into smaller ones, are called
antitrust laws. Before a large merger happens, the antitrust regulators
at the FTC and the U.S. Department of Justice can allow the merger,
prohibit it, or allow it if certain conditions are met. One common
condition is that the merger will be allowed if the firm agrees to sell
off certain parts. For example, in 2006, Johnson & Johnson bought the
Pfizer's "consumer health" division, which included well-known brands
like Listerine mouthwash and Sudafed cold medicine. As a condition of
allowing the merger, Johnson & Johnson was required to sell off six
brands to other firms, including ZantacÂ® heartburn relief medication,
Cortizone anti-itch cream, and Balmex diaper rash medication, to
preserve a greater degree of competition in these markets.

The U.S. government approves most proposed mergers. In a market-oriented
economy, firms have the freedom to make their own choices. Private firms
generally have the freedom to:

-   expand or reduce production
-   set the price they choose
-   open new factories or sales facilities or close them
-   hire workers or to lay them off
-   start selling new products or stop selling existing ones

If the owners want to acquire a firm or be acquired, or to merge with
another firm, this decision is just one of many that firms are free to
make. In these conditions, the managers of private firms will sometimes
make mistakes. They may close down a factory which, it later turns out,
would have been profitable. They may start selling a product that ends
up losing money. A merger between two companies can sometimes lead to a
clash of corporate personalities that makes both firms worse off.
However, the fundamental belief behind a market-oriented economy is that
firms, not governments, are in the best position to know if their
actions will lead to attracting more customers or producing more
efficiently.

Government regulators agree that most mergers are beneficial to
consumers. As the Federal Trade Commission has noted on its website (as
of November, 2013): "Most mergers actually benefit competition and
consumers by allowing firms to operate more efficiently." At the same
time, the FTC recognizes, "Some \[mergers\] are likely to lessen
competition. That, in turn, can lead to higher prices, reduced
availability of goods or services, lower quality of products, and less
innovation. Some mergers create a concentrated market, while others
enable a single firm to raise prices." The challenge for the antitrust
regulators at the FTC and the U.S. Department of Justice is to figure
out when a merger may hinder competition. This decision involves both
numerical tools and some judgments that are difficult to quantify. The
following Clear It Up explains the origins of U.S. antitrust law.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### What is U.S. antitrust law? {#what-is-u.s.-antitrust-law .Heading4Grey}

In the closing decades of the 1800s, many industries in the U.S. economy
were dominated by a single firm that had most of the sales for the
entire country. Supporters of these large firms argued that they could
take advantage of economies of scale and careful planning to provide
consumers with products at low prices. However, critics pointed out that
when competition was reduced, these firms were free to charge more and
make permanently higher profits, and that without the goading of
competition, it was not clear that they were as efficient or innovative
as they could be.

In many cases, these large firms were organized in the legal form of a
"trust," in which a group of formerly independent firms were
consolidated by mergers and purchases, and a group of "trustees" then
ran the companies as if they were a single firm. Thus, when the U.S.
government sought to limit the power of these trusts, it passed the
Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890 - the nation\'s first antitrust law. In an
early demonstration of the law's power, the U.S. Supreme Court in 1911
upheld the government's right to break up Standard Oil, which had
controlled about 90% of the country's oil refining, into 34 independent
firms, including Exxon, Mobil, Amoco, and Chevron. In 1914, the Clayton
Antitrust Act outlawed mergers and acquisitions (where the outcome would
be to "substantially lessen competition" in an industry), price
discrimination (where different customers are charged different prices
for the same product), and tied sales (where purchase of one product
commits the buyer to purchase some other product). Also in 1914, the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) was created to define more specifically
what competition was unfair. In 1950, the Celler-Kefauver Act extended
the Clayton Act by restricting vertical and conglomerate mergers. A
vertical merger occurs when two or more firms, operating at different
levels within an industry\'s supply chain, merge operations. A
conglomerate merger is a merger between firms that are involved in
totally unrelated business activities. In the twenty-first century, the
FTC and the U.S. Department of Justice continue to enforce antitrust
laws.

### The Four-Firm Concentration Ratio

Regulators have struggled for decades to measure the degree of monopoly
power in an industry. An early tool was the concentration ratio, which
measures the combined market share (or percent of total industry sales)
which is accounted for by the largest firms (typically the top four to
eight). For an explanation of how high market concentrations can create
inefficiencies in an economy, refer to
[Monopoly](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/9-introduction-to-a-monopoly).

Say that the market for replacing broken automobile windshields in a
certain city has 18 firms with the market shares in [Table
11.1](#Table_11_01), where the market share is each firm's proportion of
total sales in that market. We calculate the four-firm concentration
ratio by adding the market shares of the four largest firms: in this
case, 16 + 10 + 8 + 6 = 40. We do not consider this concentration ratio
especially high, because the largest four firms have less than half the
market.

Table 11.1 Calculating Concentration Ratios from Market Shares

The concentration ratio approach can help to clarify some of the
fuzziness over deciding when a merger might affect competition. For
instance, if two of the smallest firms in the hypothetical market for
repairing automobile windshields merged, the four-firm concentration
ratio would not change---which implies that there is not much worry that
the degree of competition in the market has notably diminished. However,
if the top two firms merged, then the four-firm concentration ratio
would become 46 (that is, 26 + 8 + 6 + 6). While this concentration
ratio is modestly higher, the four-firm concentration ratio would still
be less than half, so such a proposed merger might barely raise an
eyebrow among antitrust regulators.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/Google_FTC) to read an
article about Google's run-in with the FTC.

### The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index

A four-firm concentration ratio is a simple tool, which may reveal only
part of the story. For example, consider two industries that both have a
four-firm concentration ratio of 80. However, in one industry five firms
each control 20% of the market, while in the other industry, the top
firm holds 77% of the market and all the other firms have 1% each.
Although the four-firm concentration ratios are identical, it would be
reasonable to worry more about the extent of competition in the second
case---where the largest firm is nearly a monopoly---than in the first.

Another approach to measuring industry concentration that can
distinguish between these two cases is called the Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI). We calculate HHI by summing the squares of the market share
of each firm in the industry, as the following Work It Out shows.

### Work It Out {#work-it-out .Heading3Grey}

#### Calculating HHI {#calculating-hhi .Heading4Grey}

Step 1. Calculate the HHI for a monopoly with a market share of 100%.
Because there is only one firm, it has 100% market share. The HHI is
100^2^ = 10,000.

Step 2. For an extremely competitive industry, with dozens or hundreds
of extremely small competitors, the HHI value might drop as low as 100
or even less. Calculate the HHI for an industry with 100 firms that each
have 1% of the market. In this case, the HHI is 100(1^2^) = 100.

Step 3. Calculate the HHI for the industry in [Table
11.1](#Table_11_01). In this case, the HHI is 16^2^ + 10^2^ + 8^2^ +
7(6^2^) + 8(3^2^) = 744.

Step 4. Note that the HHI gives greater weight to large firms.

Step 5. Consider the earlier example, comparing one industry where five
firms each have 20% of the market with an industry where one firm has
77% and the other 23 firms have 1% each. The two industries have the
same four-firm concentration ratio of 80. However, the HHI for the first
industry is 5(20^2^) = 2,000, while the HHI for the second industry is
much higher at 77^2^ + 23(1^2^) = 5,952.

Step 6. Note that the near-monopolist in the second industry drives up
the HHI measure of industrial concentration.

Step 7. Review [Table 11.2](#Table_11_02) which gives some examples of
the four-firm concentration ratio and the HHI in various U.S. industries
in 2016. (You can find market share data from multiple industry sources.
Data in the table are from: Statista.com (for wireless), *The Wall
Street Journal* (for automobiles), Gartner.com (for computers) and the
U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics (for airlines).)

Table 11.2 Examples of Concentration Ratios and HHIs in the U.S.
Economy, 2016

In the 1980s, the FTC followed these guidelines: If a merger would
result in an HHI of less than 1,000, the FTC would probably approve it.
If a merger would result in an HHI of more than 1,800, the FTC would
probably challenge it. If a merger would result in an HHI between 1,000
and 1,800, then the FTC would scrutinize the plan and make a
case-by-case decision. However, in the last several decades, the
antitrust enforcement authorities have moved away from relying as
heavily on measures of concentration ratios and HHIs to determine
whether they will allow a merger, and instead they carry out more
case-by-case analysis on the extent of competition in different
industries.

### New Directions for Antitrust

Both the four-firm concentration ratio and the Herfindahl-Hirschman
index share some weaknesses. First, they begin from the assumption that
the "market" under discussion is well-defined, and the only question is
measuring how sales are divided in that market. Second, they are based
on an implicit assumption that competitive conditions across industries
are similar enough that a broad measure of concentration in the market
is enough to make a decision about the effects of a merger. These
assumptions, however, are not always correct. In response to these two
problems, the antitrust regulators have been changing their approach in
the last decade or two.

Defining a market is often controversial. For example, Microsoft in the
early 2000s had a dominant share of the software for computer operating
systems. However, in the total market for all computer software and
services, including everything from games to scientific programs, the
Microsoft share was only about 14% in 2014. A narrowly defined market
will tend to make concentration appear higher, while a broadly defined
market will tend to make it appear smaller.

In recent decades, there have been two especially important shifts
affecting how we define markets: one centers on technology and the other
centers on globalization. In addition, these two shifts are
interconnected. With the vast improvement in communications
technologies, including the development of the internet, a consumer can
order books or pet supplies from all over the country or the world. As a
result, the degree of competition many local retail businesses face has
increased. The same effect may operate even more strongly in markets for
business supplies, where so-called "business-to-business" websites can
allow buyers and suppliers from anywhere in the world to find each
other.

Globalization has changed the market boundaries. As recently as the
1970s, it was common for measurements of concentration ratios and HHIs
to stop at national borders. Now, many industries find that their
competition comes from the global market. A few decades ago, three
companies, General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler, dominated the U.S. auto
market. By 2014, however, production of these three firms accounted for
less than half of U.S. auto sales, although by 2021, with the emergence
of COVID-19, the three firms accounted for essentially half of U.S. auto
sales. The three firms face competition from well-known car
manufacturers such as Toyota, Honda, Nissan, Volkswagen, Mitsubishi, and
Mazda. When analysts calculate HHIs with a global perspective,
concentration in most major industries---including cars---is lower than
in a purely domestic context.

Because attempting to define a particular market can be difficult and
controversial, the Federal Trade Commission has begun to look less at
market share and more at the data on actual competition between
businesses. For example, in February 2007, Whole Foods Market and Wild
Oats Market announced that they wished to merge. These were the two
largest companies in the market that the government defined as "premium
natural and organic supermarket chains." However, one could also argue
that they were two relatively small companies in the broader market for
all stores that sell groceries or specialty food products.

Rather than relying on a market definition, the government antitrust
regulators looked at detailed evidence on profits and prices for
specific stores in different cities, both before and after other
competitive stores entered or exited. Based on that evidence, the
Federal Trade Commission decided to block the merger. After two years of
legal battles, the FTC eventually allowed the merger in 2009 under the
conditions that Whole Foods sell off the Wild Oats brand name and a
number of individual stores, to preserve competition in certain local
markets. For more on the difficulties of defining markets, refer to
[Monopoly](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/9-introduction-to-a-monopoly).

This new approach to antitrust regulation involves detailed analysis of
specific markets and companies, instead of defining a market and
counting up total sales. A common starting point is for antitrust
regulators to use statistical tools and real-world evidence to estimate
the demand curves and supply curves the firms proposing a merger face. A
second step is to specify how competition occurs in this specific
industry. Some possibilities include competing to cut prices, to raise
output, to build a brand name through advertising, and to build a
reputation for good service or high quality. With these pieces of the
puzzle in place, it is then possible to build a statistical model that
estimates the likely outcome for consumers if the two firms are allowed
to merge. These models do require some degree of subjective judgment,
and so they can become the subject of legal disputes between the
antitrust authorities and the companies that wish to merge.
