## 11.4 The Great Deregulation Experiment

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Evaluate the effectiveness of price regulation and antitrust policy
-   Explain regulatory capture and its significance

Governments at all levels across the United States have regulated prices
in a wide range of industries. In some cases, like water and electricity
that have natural monopoly characteristics, there is some room in
economic theory for such regulation. However, once politicians are given
a basis to intervene in markets and to choose prices and quantities, it
is hard to know where to stop.

### Doubts about Regulation of Prices and Quantities

Beginning in the 1970s, it became clear to policymakers of all political
leanings that the existing price regulation was not working well. The
United States carried out a great policy experiment---the deregulation
that we discussed in
[Monopoly](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/9-introduction-to-a-monopoly)---removing
government controls over prices and quantities produced in airlines,
railroads, trucking, intercity bus travel, natural gas, and bank
interest rates. The Clear It Up discusses the outcome of deregulation in
one industry in particular---airlines.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### What are the results of airline deregulation? {#what-are-the-results-of-airline-deregulation .Heading4Grey}

Why did the pendulum swing in favor of deregulation? Consider the
airline industry. In the early days of air travel, no airline could make
a profit just by flying passengers. Airlines needed something else to
carry and the Postal Service provided that something with airmail. Thus,
the first U.S. government regulation of the airline industry happened
through the Postal Service, when in 1926 the Postmaster General began
giving airlines permission to fly certain routes based on mail delivery
needs---and the airlines took some passengers along for the ride. In
1934, the antitrust authorities charged the Postmaster General with
colluding with the major airlines of that day to monopolize the nation's
airways. In 1938, the U.S. government created the Civil Aeronautics
Board (CAB) to regulate airfares and routes instead. For 40 years, from
1938 to 1978, the CAB approved all fares, controlled all entry and exit,
and specified which airlines could fly which routes. There was zero
entry of new airlines on the main routes across the country for 40
years, because the CAB did not think it was necessary.

In 1978, the Airline Deregulation Act took the government out of the
business of determining airfares and schedules. The new law shook up the
industry. Famous old airlines like Pan American, Eastern, and Braniff
went bankrupt and disappeared. Some new airlines like People Express
were created---and then vanished.

The greater competition from deregulation reduced airfares by about
one-third over the next two decades, saving consumers billions of
dollars a year. The average flight used to take off with just half its
seats full; now it is two-thirds full, which is far more efficient.
Airlines have also developed hub-and-spoke systems, where planes all fly
into a central hub city at a certain time and then depart. As a result,
one can fly between any of the spoke cities with just one
connection---and there is greater service to more cities than before
deregulation. With lower fares and more service, the number of air
passengers doubled from the late 1970s to the start of the 2000s---an
increase that, in turn, doubled the number of jobs in the airline
industry. Meanwhile, with the watchful oversight of government safety
inspectors, commercial air travel has continued to get safer over time.

The U.S. airline industry is far from perfect. For example, a string of
mergers in recent years has raised concerns over how competition might
be compromised.

One difficulty with government price regulation is what economists call
regulatory capture, in which the firms that are supposedly regulated end
up playing a large role in setting the regulations that they will
follow. When the airline industry was regulated, for example, it
suggested appointees to the regulatory board, sent lobbyists to argue
with the board, provided most of the information on which the board made
decisions, and offered well-paid jobs to at least some of the people
leaving the board. In this situation, it is easy for regulators to
poorly represent consumers. The result of regulatory capture is that
government price regulation can often become a way for existing
competitors to work together to reduce output, keep prices high, and
limit competition.

### The Effects of Deregulation

Deregulation, both of airlines and of other industries, has its
negatives. The greater pressure of competition led to entry and exit.
When firms went bankrupt or contracted substantially in size, they laid
off workers who had to find other jobs. Market competition is, after
all, a full-contact sport.

A number of major accounting scandals involving prominent corporations
such as Enron, Tyco International, and WorldCom led to the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002. The government designed Sarbanes-Oxley to
increase confidence in financial information provided by public
corporations to protect investors from accounting fraud.

The Great Recession, which began in late 2007, was caused at least in
part by a global financial crisis, which began in the United States. The
key component of the crisis was the creation and subsequent failure of
several types of unregulated financial assets, such as collateralized
mortgage obligations (CMOs, a type of mortgage-backed security), and
credit default swaps (CDSs, insurance contracts on assets like CMOs that
provided a payoff even if the holder of the CDS did not own the CMO).
Private credit rating agencies such as Standard & Poors, Moody's, and
Fitch rated many of these assets very safe.

The collapse of the markets for these assets precipitated the financial
crisis and led to the failure of Lehman Brothers, a major investment
bank, numerous large commercial banks, such as Wachovia, and even the
Federal National Mortgage Corporation (Fannie Mae), which had to be
nationalized---that is, taken over by the federal government. One
response to the financial crisis was the Dodd-Frank Act, which majorly
attempted to reform the financial system. The legislation's purpose, as
noted on dodd-frank.com is:

> To promote the financial stability of the United States by improving
> accountability and transparency in the financial system, to end "too
> big to fail," to protect the American taxpayer by ending bailouts,
> \[and\] to protect consumers from abusive financial services
> practices. . .

All market-based economies operate against a background of laws and
regulations, including laws about enforcing contracts, collecting taxes,
and protecting health and the environment. The government policies that
we discussed in this chapter---like blocking certain anticompetitive
mergers, ending restrictive practices, imposing price cap regulation on
natural monopolies, and deregulation---demonstrate the role of
government to strengthen the incentives that come with a greater degree
of competition.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### More than Cooking, Heating, and Cooling {#more-than-cooking-heating-and-cooling .Heading4Grey}

What did the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) decide on the Kinder Morgan
/ El Paso Corporation merger? After careful examination, federal
officials decided there was only one area of significant overlap that
might provide the merged firm with strong market power. The FTC approved
the merger, provided Kinder Morgan divest itself of the overlap area.
Tallgrass purchased Kinder Morgan Interstate Gas Transmission,
Trailblazer Pipeline Co. LLC, two processing facilities in Wyoming, and
Kinder Morgan's 50 percent interest in the Rockies Express Pipeline to
meet the FTC requirements. The FTC was attempting to strike a balance
between potential cost reductions resulting from economies of scale and
concentration of market power.

Did the price of natural gas decrease? Yes, rather significantly. In
2010, the wellhead price of natural gas was \$4.48 per thousand cubic
foot. In 2012 the price had fallen to just \$2.66. Was the merger
responsible for the large drop in price? The answer is uncertain. The
larger contributor to the sharp drop in price was the overall increase
in the supply of natural gas. Increasingly, more natural gas was able to
be recovered by fracturing shale deposits, a process called fracking.
Fracking, which is controversial for environmental reasons, enabled the
recovery of known reserves of natural gas that previously were not
economically feasible to tap. Kinder Morgan's control of 80,000-plus
miles of pipeline likely made moving the gas from wellheads to end users
smoother and allowed for an even greater benefit from the increased
supply.
