## 12.4 The Benefits and Costs of U.S. Environmental Laws

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Evaluate the benefits and costs of environmental protection
-   Explain the effects of ecotourism
-   Apply marginal analysis to illustrate the marginal costs and
    marginal benefits of reducing pollution

Government economists have estimated that U.S. firms may pay more than
\$200 billion per year to comply with federal environmental laws. That
is a sizable amount of money. Is the money well spent?

### Benefits and Costs of Clean Air and Clean Water

We can divide the benefits of a cleaner environment into four areas: (1)
people may stay healthier and live longer; (2) certain industries that
rely on clean air and water, such as farming, fishing, and tourism, may
benefit; (3) property values may be higher; and (4) people may simply
enjoy a cleaner environment in a way that does not need to involve a
market transaction. Some of these benefits, such as gains to tourism or
farming, are relatively easy to value in economic terms. It is harder to
assign a monetary value to others, such as the value of clean air for
someone with asthma. It seems difficult to put a clear-cut monetary
value on still others, such as the satisfaction you might feel from
knowing that the air is clear over the Grand Canyon, even if you have
never visited the Grand Canyon, but advanced techniques in economics
allow one to generate estimates.

Although estimates of environmental benefits are not precise, they can
still be revealing. For example, a study by the Environmental Protection
Agency looked at the costs and benefits of the Clean Air Act from 1970
to 1990. It found that total costs over that time period were roughly
\$500 billion---a huge amount. However, it also found that a
middle-range estimate of the health and other benefits from cleaner air
was \$22 trillion---about 44 times higher than the costs. A more recent
EPA study estimated that the environmental benefits to Americans from
the Clean Air Act will exceed their costs by a margin of four to one.
The EPA estimated that "in 2010 the benefits of Clean Air Act programs
will total about \$110 billion. This estimate represents the value of
avoiding increases in illness and premature death which would have
prevailed." Saying that overall benefits of environmental regulation
have exceeded costs in the past, however, is very different from saying
that every environmental regulation makes sense. For example, studies
suggest that when breaking down emission reductions by type of
contaminants, the benefits of air pollution control outweigh the costs
primarily for particulates and lead, but when looking at other air
pollutants, the costs of reducing them may be comparable to or greater
than the benefits. Just because some environmental regulations have had
benefits much higher than costs does not prove that every individual
regulation is a sensible idea.

### Ecotourism: Making Environmentalism Pay

The definition of ecotourism is a little vague. Does it mean sleeping on
the ground, eating roots, and getting close to wild animals? Does it
mean flying in a helicopter to shoot anesthetic darts at African
wildlife, or a little of both? The definition may be fuzzy, but tourists
who hope to appreciate the ecology of their destination---"eco
tourists"---are the impetus to a big and growing business. The
International Ecotourism Society estimates that international tourists
interested in seeing nature or wildlife would take 1.56 billion trips by
2020. While COVID-19 prevented this from happening in 2020, it is clear
that there is a strong demand for ecotourism.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit The International Ecotourism Society's
[website](http://openstax.org/l/ecotourism) to learn more about The
International Ecotourism Society, its programs, and tourism's role in
sustainable community development.

Realizing the attraction of ecotourism, the residents of low-income
countries may come to see that preserving wildlife habitats is more
lucrative than, say, cutting down forests or grazing livestock. In South
Africa, Namibia, and Zimbabwe, for example, ecotourism has given local
communities an economic interest in protecting elephant and rhinoceros
populations. Some of the leading ecotourism destinations include Costa
Rica and Panama in Central America; the Caribbean; Malaysia, and other
South Pacific destinations; New Zealand; the Serengeti in Tanzania; the
Amazon rain forests; and the Galapagos Islands. In many of these
countries and regions, governments have enacted policies whereby they
share revenues from ecotourism with local communities, to give people in
those local communities a kind of property right that encourages them to
conserve their local environment.

Ecotourism needs careful management, so that the combination of eager
tourists and local entrepreneurs does not destroy what the visitors are
coming to see. And recent research indicates that wild animals that are
continually exposed to tourists and vehicles exhibit stress and atypical
behaviors. In general, however, well-managed ecotourism is viewed as a
net positive, which provides an alternative to damaging the local
environment.

### Marginal Benefits and Marginal Costs

We can use the tools of marginal analysis to illustrate the marginal
costs and the marginal benefits of reducing pollution. [Figure
12.4](#CNX_Econ_C12_003) illustrates a theoretical model of this
situation. When the quantity of environmental protection is low so that
pollution is extensive---for example, at quantity Qa---there are usually
numerous relatively cheap and easy ways to reduce pollution, and the
marginal benefits of doing so are quite high. At Qa, it makes sense to
allocate more resources to fight pollution. However, as the extent of
environmental protection increases, the cheap and easy ways of reducing
pollution begin to decrease, and one must use more costly methods. The
marginal cost curve rises. Also, as environmental protection increases,
one achieves the largest marginal benefits first, followed by reduced
marginal benefits. As the quantity of environmental protection increases
to, say, Qb, the gap between marginal benefits and marginal costs
narrows. At point Qc the marginal costs will exceed the marginal
benefits. At this level of environmental protection, society is not
allocating resources efficiently, because it is forfeiting too many
resources to reduce pollution.

![](media/rId32.jpeg){width="3.66in" height="2.975in"}

Figure 12.4 Marginal Costs and Marginal Benefits of Environmental
Protection Reducing pollution is costly---one must sacrifice resources.
The marginal costs of reducing pollution are generally increasing,
because one can first make the least expensive and easiest reductions,
leaving the more expensive methods for later. The marginal benefits of
reducing pollution are generally declining, because one can take the
steps that provide the greatest benefit first, and steps that provide
less benefit can wait until later.

As society draws closer to Qb, some might argue that it becomes more
important to use market-oriented environmental tools to hold down the
costs of reducing pollution. Their objective would be to avoid
environmental rules that would provide the quantity of environmental
protection at Qc, where marginal costs exceed marginal benefits. The
following Clear It Up feature delves into how the EPA measures its
policies -- and the monetary value of our lives.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### What\'s a life worth? {#whats-a-life-worth .Heading4Grey}

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) must estimate the value
of saving lives by reducing pollution against the additional costs. In
measuring the benefits of government environmental policies, the EPA's
National Center for Environmental Economics (NCEE) values a statistical
human life at \$7.4 million (in 2006 U.S. dollars, which corresponds to
a little more than \$10.5 million in February 2022.)

Economists value a human life on the basis of studies of the value that
people actually place on human lives in their own decisions. For
example, some jobs have a higher probability of death than others, and
these jobs typically pay more to compensate for the risk. Examples are
ocean fishery as opposed to fish farming, and ice trucking in Alaska as
opposed to truck driving in the "lower forty-eight" states.

Government regulators use estimates such as these when deciding what
proposed regulations are "reasonable," which means deciding which
proposals have high enough benefits to justify their cost. For example,
when the U.S. Department of Transportation makes decisions about what
safety systems should be required in cars or airplanes, it will approve
rules only where the estimated cost per life saved is \$3 million or
less.

Resources that we spend on life-saving regulations create a tradeoff. A
study by W. Kip Viscusi of Vanderbilt University estimated that when a
regulation costs \$50 million, it diverts enough spending in the rest of
the economy from health care and safety expenditures that it costs a
life. This finding suggests that any regulation that costs more than
\$50 million per life saved actually costs lives, rather than saving
them.

### References

Ryan, Dave. "New Report Shows Benefits of 1990 Clean Air Amendments
Outweigh Costs by Four-to-One Margin," press release, November 16, 1999.
*United States Environmental Protection Agency.* Accessed December 19,
2013. http://www.epa.gov/oar/sect812/r-140.html.

National Center for Environmental Economics (NCEE). "Frequently Asked
Questions on Mortality Risk Valuation." *United States Environmental
Protection Agency.* Accessed December 19, 2013.
http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/pages/MortalityRiskValuation.html#whatvalue
World Tourism Organization, "Tourism 2020 Vision." Accessed December 19,
2013.
http://www.world-tourism.org/market_research/facts/market_trends.htm.

Viscusi, Kip W. *Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities
for Risk.* New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
