## 12.6 The Tradeoff between Economic Output and Environmental Protection

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Apply the production possibility frontier to evaluate the tradeoff
    between economic output and the environment
-   Interpret a graphic representation of the tradeoff between economic
    output and environmental protection

We can analyze the tradeoff between economic output and the environment
with a production possibility frontier (PPF) such as the one in [Figure
12.5](#CNX_Econ_C12_004). At one extreme, at a choice like P, a country
would be selecting a high level of economic output but very little
environmental protection. At the other extreme, at a choice like T, a
country would be selecting a high level of environmental protection but
little economic output. According to the graph, an increase in
environmental protection involves an opportunity cost of less economic
output. No matter what their preferences, all societies should wish to
avoid choices like M, which are productively inefficient. Efficiency
requires that the choice should be on the production possibility
frontier.

![](media/rId23.jpeg){width="3.5in" height="2.725in"}

Figure 12.5 The Tradeoff between Economic Output and Environmental
Protection Each society will have to weigh its own values and decide
whether it prefers a choice like P with more economic output and less
environmental protection, or a choice like T with more environmental
protection and less economic output.

Economists do not have a great deal to say about the choice between P,
Q, R, S and T in [Figure 12.5](#CNX_Econ_C12_004), all of which lie
along the production possibility frontier. Countries with low per capita
gross domestic product (GDP), such as India, place a greater emphasis on
economic output---which in turn helps to produce nutrition, shelter,
health, education, and desirable consumer goods. Countries with higher
income levels, where a greater share of people have access to the basic
necessities of life, may be willing to place a relatively greater
emphasis on environmental protection.

However, economists are united in their belief that an inefficient
choice such as M is undesirable. Rather than choosing M, a nation could
achieve either greater economic output with the same environmental
protection, as at point Q, or greater environmental protection with the
same level of output, as at point S. The problem with
command-and-control environmental laws is that they sometimes involve a
choice like M. Market-oriented environmental tools offer a mechanism for
providing either the same environmental protection at lower cost, or
providing a greater degree of environmental protection for the same
cost.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Keystone XL {#keystone-xl .Heading4Grey}

How would an economist respond to claims of environmental damage caused
by the Keystone XL project? Clearly, we can consider the environmental
cost of oil spills a negative externality, but how large would these
external costs be? Furthermore, are these costs "too high" when we
measure them against any potential for economic benefit?

As this chapter indicates, in deciding whether pipeline construction is
a good idea, an economist would want to know not only about the marginal
benefits resulting from the additional pipeline construction, but also
the potential marginal costs---and especially the pipeline\'s marginal
external costs. Typically these come in the form of environmental impact
statements, which are usually required for such projects. For example,
an impact statement, released in March 2013 by the Nebraska Department
of State, considered the possibility of fewer pipeline miles going over
the aquifer system and avoiding completely environmentally fragile
areas. It indicated that pipeline construction would not harm \"most
resources\".

As noted at the outset of this chapter, the Obama Administration
declined to approve construction of the Keystone XL project. However,
the Trump administration announced its willingness to do so, but as
noted earlier, the Biden administration effectively ended the project.
While we may fairly easily quantify the economic benefits of additional
oil in the United States, the social costs are more challenging to
measure. Consequently, different observers may reach different
conclusions about the balance between estimates of economic benefits and
estimates of the social costs of the pipeline project.
