## Critical Thinking Questions

29\.

Suppose you want to put a dollar value on the external costs of carbon
emissions from a power plant. What information or data would you obtain
to measure the external \[not social\] cost?

30\.

Would environmentalists favor command-and-control policies as a way to
reduce pollution? Why or why not?

31\.

Consider two ways of protecting elephants from poachers in African
countries. In one approach, the government sets up enormous national
parks that have sufficient habitat for elephants to thrive and forbids
all local people to enter the parks or to injure either the elephants or
their habitat in any way. In a second approach, the government sets up
national parks and designates 10 villages around the edges of the park
as official tourist centers that become places where tourists can stay
and bases for guided tours inside the national park. Consider the
different incentives of local villagers---who often are living in
poverty---in each of these plans. Which plan seems more likely to help
the elephant population?

32\.

Will a system of marketable permits work with thousands of firms? Why or
why not?

33\.

Is zero pollution possible under a marketable permits system? Why or why
not?

34\.

Is zero pollution an optimal goal? Why or why not?

35\.

From an economic perspective, is it sound policy to pursue a goal of
zero pollution? Why or why not?

36\.

Recycling is a relatively inexpensive solution to much of the
environmental contamination from plastics, glass, and other waste
materials. Is it a sound policy to make it mandatory for everybody to
recycle?

37\.

Can extreme levels of pollution hurt the economic development of a
high-income country? Why or why not?

38\.

How can high-income countries benefit from covering much of the cost of
reducing pollution created by low-income countries?

39\.

Technological innovations shift the production possibility curve. Look
at graph you sketched for [Exercise
12.13](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/12-self-check-questions#fs-idm84125904).
Which types of technologies should a country promote? Should "clean"
technologies be promoted over other technologies? Why or why not?
