![](media/rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.925in"}

Figure 13.1 [View from Voyager I](http://openstax.org/l/voyager1)
Launched by NASA on September 5, 1977, Voyager I's primary mission was
to provide detailed images of Jupiter, Saturn, and their moons. It took
this photograph of Jupiter on its journey. In August of 2012, Voyager I
entered interstellar space---the first human-made object to do so---and
it is expected to send data and images back to earth until 2025. Such a
technological feat entails many economic principles. (Credit:
modification of \"Voyager\'s View of Jupiter\'s Great Red Spot\" by
NASA/JPL, Public Domain)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   Why the Private Sector Underinvests in Technologies
-   How Governments Can Encourage Innovation
-   Public Goods

## Introduction to Positive Externalities and Public Goods

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### The Benefits of Voyager I Endure {#the-benefits-of-voyager-i-endure .Heading4Grey}

The rapid growth of technology has increased our ability to access and
process data, to navigate through a busy city, and to communicate with
friends on the other side of the globe. The research and development
efforts of citizens, scientists, firms, universities, and governments
have truly revolutionized the modern economy. To get a sense of how far
we have come in a short period of time, let's compare one of humankind's
greatest achievements to the smartphone.

In 1977 the United States launched Voyager I, a spacecraft originally
intended to reach Jupiter and Saturn, to send back photographs and other
cosmic measurements. Voyager I, however, kept going, and going---past
Jupiter and Saturn---right out of our solar system. At the time of its
launch, Voyager had some of the most sophisticated computing processing
power NASA could engineer (8,000 instructions per second), but today, we
Earthlings use handheld devices that can process 14 billion instructions
per second.

Still, the technology of today is a spillover product of the incredible
feats NASA accomplished over forty years ago. NASA research, for
instance, is responsible for the kidney dialysis and mammogram machines
that we use today. Research in new technologies not only produces
private benefits to the investing firm, or in this case to NASA, but it
also creates benefits for the broader society. In this way, new
knowledge often becomes what economists refer to as a public good. This
leads us to the topic of this chapter---technology, positive
externalities, public goods, and the role of government in encouraging
innovation and the social benefits that it provides.

As economist Mariana Mazzucato explores in her well-known work *The
Entrepreneurial State*, what makes a smartphone smart? What allows its
apps to help you navigate new towns while getting updates about your
home, all while your hands are on the steering wheel and your children
are in the back seat watching their shows? For starters, the internet,
cell tower networks, GPS, and voice activation. Each of these, and many
other technologies we rely on, were developed with intensive government
support. For example, GPS, which enables many cell phone functions
beyond the frequently used mapping and ride-sharing applications, was
developed by the U.S. Department of Defense over several generations of
satellite tracking and complex computer algorithm development. The U.S.
government still provides GPS for many of the world's users.

We do not often think of the government when we consider our leading
products and entrepreneurs. We think of Apple, Google, Lyft, Tesla,
Fitbit, and so on---creative innovators who built on the tools provided
by these government efforts, using them in transformative ways. We may
not think of the estimated \$19 billion per year that the U.S. spends to
maintain the GPS system, but we would certainly think of it if it
suddenly went away. (Beyond the impact on our daily lives, economists
estimate U.S. businesses alone would lose about \$1 billion per day
without GPS.)

Mazzucato is one of several prominent economists advocating for an
embrace of continued government-sponsored innovations in order to build
economic prosperity, reduce inequality, and manage ongoing challenges
such as drought, coastal changes, and extreme weather. She argues that
competitive, private sector markets are often resistant to the risks
involved with large-scale innovation, because failed experiments and
lack of uptake lead to massive corporate and personal losses.
Governments can take on riskier research and development projects.
Because government spending is fueled by taxpayers, and all innovation
leads to some level of employment change, these proposals are certainly
complex and challenging to implement.

This chapter deals with some of these issues: Will private companies be
willing to invest in new technology? In what ways does new technology
have positive externalities? What motivates inventors? What role should
government play in encouraging research and technology? Are there
certain types of goods that markets fail to provide efficiently, and
that only government can produce? What happens when consumption or
production of a product creates positive externalities? Why is it
unsurprising when we overuse a common resource, like marine fisheries?
