## Key Concepts and Summary

### 13.1 Investments in Innovation

Competition creates pressure to innovate. However, if one can easily
copy new inventions, then the original inventor loses the incentive to
invest further in research and development. New technology often has
positive externalities; that is, there are often spillovers from the
invention of new technology that benefit firms other than the innovator.
The social benefit of an invention, once the firm accounts for these
spillovers, typically exceeds the private benefit to the inventor. If
inventors could receive a greater share of the broader social benefits
for their work, they would have a greater incentive to seek out new
inventions.

### 13.2 How Governments Can Encourage Innovation

Public policy with regard to technology must often strike a balance. For
example, patents provide an incentive for inventors, but they should be
limited to genuinely new inventions and not extend forever.

Government has a variety of policy tools for increasing the rate of
return for new technology and encouraging its development, including:
direct government funding of R&D, tax incentives for R&D, protection of
intellectual property, and forming cooperative relationships between
universities and the private sector.

### 13.3 Public Goods

A public good has two key characteristics: it is nonexcludable and
non-rival. Nonexcludable means that it is costly or impossible for one
user to exclude others from using the good. Non-rival means that when
one person uses the good, it does not prevent others from using it.
Markets often have a difficult time producing public goods because free
riders will attempt to use the public good without paying for it. One
can overcome the free rider problem through measures to assure that
users of the public good pay for it. Such measures include government
actions, social pressures, and specific situations where markets have
discovered a way to collect payments.
