## 14.1 The Theory of Labor Markets

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Describe the demand for labor in perfectly competitive output
    markets
-   Describe the demand for labor in imperfectly competitive output
    markets
-   Identify what determines the going market rate for labor

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### What is the labor market? {#what-is-the-labor-market .Heading4Grey}

The labor market is the term that economists use for all the different
markets for labor. There is no single labor market. Rather, there is a
different market for every different type of labor. Labor differs by
type of work (e.g. retail sales vs. scientist), skill level (entry level
or more experienced), and location (the market for administrative
assistants is probably more local or regional than the market for
university presidents). While each labor market is different, they all
tend to operate in similar ways. For example, when wages go up in one
labor market, they tend to go up in others too. When economists talk
about the labor market, they are describing these similarities.

The labor market, like all markets, has a demand and a supply. Why do
firms demand labor? Why is an employer willing to pay you for your
labor? It's not because the employer likes you or is socially conscious.
Rather, it's because your labor is worth something to the
employer\--your work brings in revenues to the firm. How much is an
employer willing to pay? That depends on the skills and experience you
bring to the firm.

If a firm wants to maximize profits, it will never pay more (in terms of
wages and benefits) for a worker than the value of their marginal
productivity to the firm. We call this the first rule of labor markets.

Suppose a worker can produce two widgets per hour and the firm can sell
each widget for \$4 each. Then the worker is generating \$8 per hour in
revenues to the firm, and a profit-maximizing employer will pay the
worker up to, but no more than, \$8 per hour, because that is what the
worker is worth to the firm.

Recall the definition of marginal product. Marginal product is the
additional output a firm can produce by adding one more worker to the
production process. Since employers often hire labor by the hour, we'll
define marginal product as the additional output the firm produces by
adding one more worker hour to the production process. In this chapter,
we assume that workers in a particular labor market are
homogeneous---they have the same background, experience and skills and
they put in the same amount of effort. Thus, marginal product depends on
the capital and technology with which workers have to work.

A typist can type more pages per hour with an electric typewriter than a
manual typewriter, and the typist can type even more pages per hour with
a personal computer and word processing software. A ditch digger can dig
more cubic feet of dirt in an hour with a backhoe than with a shovel.

Thus, we can define the demand for labor as the marginal product of
labor times the value of that output to the firm.

Table 14.1 Marginal Product of Labor

![](media/rId24.jpeg){width="3.255in" height="2.405in"}

Figure 14.2 Marginal Product of Labor Because of fixed capital, the
marginal product of labor declines as the employer hires additional
workers.

On what does the value of each worker's marginal product depend? If we
assume that the employer sells its output in a perfectly competitive
market, the value of each worker's output will be the market price of
the product. Thus,

Demand for Labor = MP~L~ x P = Value of the Marginal Product of Labor

We show this in [Table 14.2](#eip-258), which is an expanded version of
[Table 14.1](#eip-147)

Table 14.2 Value of the Marginal Product of Labor

Note that the value of each additional worker is less than the value of
the ones who came before.

![](media/rId27.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.455in"}

Figure 14.3 Value of the Marginal Product of Labor For firms operating
in a competitive output market, the value of additional output sold is
the price the firms receive for the output. Since MP~L~ declines with
additional labor employed, while that marginal product is worth the
market price, the value of the marginal product declines as employment
increases.

### Demand for Labor in Perfectly Competitive Output Markets

The question for any firm is how much labor to hire.

We can define a Perfectly Competitive Labor Market as one where firms
can hire all the labor they want at the going market wage. Think about
secretaries in a large city. Employers who need secretaries can probably
hire as many as they need if they pay the going wage rate.

Graphically, this means that firms face a horizontal supply curve for
labor, as Figure 14.3 shows.

Given the market wage, profit maximizing firms hire workers up to the
point where: W~mkt~ = VMP~L~

![](media/rId31.jpeg){width="3.255in" height="2.405in"}

Figure 14.4 Equilibrium Employment for Firms in a Competitive Labor
Market In a perfectly competitive labor market, firms can hire all the
labor they want at the going market wage. Therefore, they hire workers
up to the point L~1~ where the going market wage equals the value of the
marginal product of labor.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-1 .Heading3Grey}

#### Derived Demand {#derived-demand .Heading4Grey}

Economists describe the demand for inputs like labor as a derived
demand. Since the demand for labor is MPL\*P, it is dependent on the
demand for the product the firm is producing. We show this by the P term
in the demand for labor. An increase in demand for the firm's product
drives up the product's price, which increases the firm's demand for
labor. Thus, we derive the demand for labor from the demand for the
firm's output.

### Demand for Labor in Imperfectly Competitive Output Markets

If the employer does not sell its output in a perfectly competitive
industry, they face a downward sloping demand curve for output, which
means that in order to sell additional output the firm must lower its
price. This is true if the firm is a monopoly, but it's also true if the
firm is an oligopoly or monopolistically competitive. In this situation,
the value of a worker's marginal product is the marginal revenue, not
the price. Thus, the demand for labor is the marginal product times the
marginal revenue.

The Demand for Labor = MP~L~ x MR = Marginal Revenue Product

Table 14.3 Marginal Revenue Product

![](media/rId38.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.455in"}

Figure 14.5 Marginal Revenue Product For firms with some market power in
their output market, the value of additional output sold is the firm's
marginal revenue. Since MP~L~ declines with additional labor employed
and since MR declines with additional output sold, the firm's marginal
revenue declines as employment increases.

Everything else remains the same as we described above in the discussion
of the labor demand in perfectly competitive labor markets. Given the
market wage, profit-maximizing firms will hire workers up to the point
where the market wage equals the marginal revenue product, as [Figure
14.6](#CNX_Econ2e_C15_009) shows.

![](media/rId41.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.405in"}

Figure 14.6 Equilibrium Level of Employment for Firms with Market Power
For firms with market power in their output market, they choose the
number of workers, L~2~, where the going market wage equals the firm's
marginal revenue product. Note that since marginal revenue is less than
price, the demand for labor for a firm which has market power in its
output market is less than the demand for labor (L~1~) for a perfectly
competitive firm. As a result, employment will be lower in an
imperfectly competitive industry than in a perfectly competitive
industry.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-2 .Heading3Grey}

#### Do Profit Maximizing Employers Exploit Labor? {#do-profit-maximizing-employers-exploit-labor .Heading4Grey}

If you look back at [Figure 14.4](#CNX_Econ_C15_003), you will see that
the firm pays only the last worker it hires what they're worth to the
firm. Every other worker brings in more revenue than the firm pays them.
This has sometimes led to the claim that employers exploit workers
because they do not pay workers what they are worth. Let's think about
this claim. The first worker is worth \$x to the firm, and the second
worker is worth \$y, but why are they worth that much? It is because of
the capital and technology with which they work. The difference between
workers' worth and their compensation goes to pay for the capital and
technology, without which the workers wouldn't have a job. The
difference also goes to the employer's profit, without which the firm
would close and workers wouldn't have a job. The firm may be earning
excessive profits, but that is a different topic of discussion.

### What Determines the Going Market Wage Rate?

In the chapter on [Labor and Financial
Markets](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/4-introduction-to-labor-and-financial-markets),
we learned that the labor market has demand and supply curves like other
markets. The demand for labor curve is a downward sloping function of
the wage rate. The market demand for labor is the horizontal sum of all
firms' demands for labor. The supply of labor curve is an upward sloping
function of the wage rate. This is because if wages for a particular
type of labor increase in a particular labor market, people with
appropriate skills may change jobs, and vacancies will attract people
from outside the geographic area. The market supply of labor is the
horizontal summation of all individuals' supplies of labor.

![](media/rId48.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.405in"}

Figure 14.7 The Market Wage Rate In a competitive labor market, the
equilibrium wage and employment level are determined where the market
demand for labor equals the market supply of labor.

Like all equilibrium prices, the market wage rate is determined through
the interaction of supply and demand in the labor market. Thus, we can
see in [Figure 14.7](#CNX_Econ_C15_010) for competitive markets the wage
rate and number of workers hired.

The FRED database has a great deal of data on labor markets, starting at
[the wage rate and number of workers
hired](https://openstax.org/l/cat10).

The United States Census Bureau for the Bureau of Labor Statistics
publishes *The Current Population Survey*, which is a monthly survey of
households (you can find a link to it by going to the FRED database
found in the previous link), which provides data on labor supply,
including numerous measures of the labor force size (disaggregated by
age, gender and educational attainment), labor force participation rates
for different demographic groups, and employment. It also includes more
than 3,500 measures of earnings by different demographic groups.

*The Current Employment Statistics*, which is a survey of businesses,
offers alternative estimates of employment across all sectors of the
economy.

The FRED database, found in the previous link, also has a link labeled
\"Productivity and Costs\" has a wide range of data on productivity,
labor costs, and profits across the business sector.
