## 14.2 Wages and Employment in an Imperfectly Competitive Labor Market

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Define monopsony power
-   Explain how imperfectly competitive labor markets determine wages
    and employment, where employers have market power

In the chapters on market structure, we observed that while economists
use the theory of perfect competition as an ideal case of market
structure, there are very few examples of perfectly competitive
industries in the real world. What about labor markets? How many labor
markets are perfectly competitive? There are probably more examples of
perfectly competitive labor markets than perfectly competitive product
markets, but that doesn't mean that all labor markets are competitive.

When a job applicant is bargaining with an employer for a position, the
applicant is often at a disadvantage---needing the job more than the
employer needs that particular applicant. John Bates Clark (1847--1938),
often named as the first great American economist, wrote in 1907: "In
the making of the wages contract the individual laborer is always at a
disadvantage. He has something which he is obliged to sell and which his
employer is not obliged to take, since he \[that is, the employer\] can
reject single men with impunity."

To give workers more power, the U.S. government has passed, in response
to years of labor protests, a number of laws to create a more equal
balance of power between workers and employers. These laws include some
of the following:

-   Setting minimum hourly wages
-   Setting maximum hours of work (at least before employers pay
    overtime rates)
-   Prohibiting child labor
-   Regulating health and safety conditions in the workplace
-   Preventing discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender,
    sexual orientation, and age
-   Requiring employers to provide family leave
-   Requiring employers to give advance notice of layoffs
-   Covering workers with unemployment insurance
-   Setting a limit on the number of immigrant workers from other
    countries

[Table 14.4](#eip-416) lists some prominent U.S. workplace protection
laws. Many of the laws listed in the table were only the start of labor
market regulations in these areas and have been followed, over time, by
other related laws, regulations, and court rulings.

Table 14.4 Prominent U.S. Workplace Protection Laws

There are two sources of imperfect competition in labor markets. These
are demand side sources, that is, labor market power by employers, and
supply side sources: labor market power by employees. In this section we
will discuss the former. In the next section we will discuss the latter.

A competitive labor market is one where there are many potential
employers for a given type of worker, say a secretary or an accountant.
Suppose there is only one employer in a labor market. Because that
employer has no direct competition in hiring, if they offer lower wages
than would exist in a competitive market, employees will have few
options. If they want a job, they must accept the offered wage rate.
Since the employer is exploiting its market power, we call the firm a
monopsony, a term introduced and widely discussed by Joan Robinson
(though she credited scholar Bertrand Hallward with invention of the
word). The classical example of monopsony is the sole coal company in a
West Virginia town. If coal miners want to work, they must accept what
the coal company is paying. This is not the only example of monopsony.
Think about surgical nurses in a town with only one hospital. A
situation in which employers have at least some market power over
potential employees is not that unusual. After all, most firms have many
employees while there is only one employer. Thus, even if there is some
competition for workers, it may not feel that way to potential employees
unless they do their research and find the opposite.

How does market power by an employer affect labor market outcomes?
Intuitively, one might think that wages will be lower than in a
competitive labor market. Let's prove it. We will tell the story for a
monopsonist, but the results will be qualitatively similar, although
less extreme, for any firm with labor market power.

Think back to monopoly. The good news for the firm is that because the
monopolist is the sole supplier in the market, it can charge any price
it wishes. The bad news is that if it wants to sell a greater quantity
of output, it must lower the price it charges. Monopsony is analogous.
Because the monopsonist is the sole employer in a labor market, it can
offer any wage that it wishes. However, because they face the market
supply curve for labor, if they want to hire more workers, they must
raise the wage they pay. This creates a quandary, which we can
understand by introducing a new concept: the marginal cost of labor. The
marginal cost of labor is the cost to the firm of hiring one more
worker. However, here is the thing: we assume that the firm is
determining how many workers to hire in total. They are not hiring
sequentially. Let's look how this plays out with the example in [Table
14.5](#eip-142).

Table 14.5 The Marginal Cost of Labor

There are a couple of things to notice from the table. First, the
marginal cost increases faster than the wage rate. In fact, for any
number of workers more than one, the marginal cost of labor is greater
than the wage. This is because to hire one more worker requires paying a
higher wage rate, not just for the new worker but for all the previous
hires also. We can see this graphically in Figure 14.7.

![](media/rId24.jpeg){width="3.255in" height="2.405in"}

Figure 14.8 The Marginal Cost of Labor Since monopsonies are the sole
demander for labor, they face the market supply curve for labor. In
order to increase employment they must raise the wage they pay not just
for new workers, but for all the existing workers they could have hired
at the previous lower wage. As a result, the marginal cost of hiring
additional labor is greater than the wage, and thus for any level of
employment (above the first worker), MC~L~ is above the Market Supply of
Labor.

![](media/rId27.jpeg){width="3.255in" height="2.405in"}

Figure 14.9 Labor Market Outcomes Under Monopsony A monopsony will hire
workers up to the point Lm where its demand for labor equals the
marginal cost of additional labor, paying the wage Wm given by the
supply curve of labor necessary to obtain Lm workers.

If the firm wants to maximize profits, it will hire labor up to the
point Lm where D~L~ = VMP (or MRP) = MC~L~, as [Figure
14.9](#CNX_Econ2e_C15_012) shows. Then, the supply curve for labor shows
the wage the firm will have to pay to attract Lm workers. Graphically,
we can draw a vertical line up from Lm to the Supply Curve for the label
and then read the wage Wm off the vertical axis to the left.

How does this outcome compare to what would occur in a perfectly
competitive market? A competitive market would operate where D~L~ =
S~L~, hiring Lc workers and paying Wc wage. In other words, under
monopsony employers hire fewer workers and pay a lower wage. While pure
monopsony may be rare, many employers have some degree of market power
in labor markets. The outcomes for those employers will be qualitatively
similar though not as extreme as monopsony.

![](media/rId30.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.465in"}

Figure 14.10 Comparison of labor market outcomes: Monopsony vs. Perfect
Competition A monopsony hires fewer workers (Lm) than would be hired in
a competitive labor market (Lc). In exploiting its market power, the
monopsony can also pay a lower wage (Wm) than workers would earn in a
competitive labor market (Wc).
