## Self-Check Questions

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#eip-473-solution).

[Table 14.10](#Table_15_04) shows levels of employment (Labor), the
marginal product at each of those levels, and the price at which the
firm can sell output in the perfectly competitive market where it
operates.

Table 14.10

a.  What is the value of the marginal product at each level of labor?
b.  If the firm operates in a perfectly competitive labor market where
    the going market wage is \$12, what is the firm's profit maximizing
    level of employment?

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#eip-194-solution).

[Table 14.11](#Table_15_03) shows levels of employment (Labor), the
marginal product at each of those levels, and a monopoly's marginal
revenue.

Table 14.11

a.  What is the monopoly's marginal revenue product at each level of
    employment?
b.  If the monopoly operates in a perfectly competitive labor market
    where the going market wage is \$20, what is the firm's profit
    maximizing level of employment?

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#fs-idm107386848-solution).

[Table 14.12](#Table_15_05) shows the quantity demanded and supplied in
the labor market for driving city buses in the town of Unionville, where
all the bus drivers belong to a union.

Table 14.12

a.  What would the equilibrium wage and quantity be in this market if no
    union existed?
b.  Assume that the union has enough negotiating power to raise the wage
    to \$4 per hour higher than it would otherwise be. Is there now
    excess demand or excess supply of labor?

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#fs-idm53747568-solution).

Do unions typically oppose new technology out of a fear that it will
reduce the number of union jobs? Why or why not?

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#fs-idm142354720-solution).

Compared with the share of workers in most other high-income countries,
is the share of U.S. workers whose wages are determined by union
bargaining higher or lower? Why or why not?

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#fs-idp48117792-solution).

Are firms with a high percentage of union employees more likely to go
bankrupt because of the higher wages that they pay? Why or why not?

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#fs-idm83279824-solution).

Do countries with a higher percentage of unionized workers usually have
less growth in productivity because of strikes and other disruptions
caused by the unions? Why or why not?

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#eip-874-solution).

[Table 14.13](#eip-idm1281877968) shows information from the supply
curve for labor for a monopsonist, that is, the wage rate required at
each level of employment.

Table 14.13

a.  What is the monopsonist's marginal cost of labor at each level of
    employment?
b.  If each unit of labor's marginal revenue product is \$13, what is
    the firm's profit maximizing level of employment and wage?

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#eip-258-solution).

Explain in each of the following situations how market forces might give
a business an incentive to act in a less discriminatory fashion.

a.  A local flower delivery business that had intentionally served only
    White customers notices that many of the local residents are Black.
b.  An assembly line has traditionally only hired men, but it is having
    a hard time hiring sufficiently qualified workers.
c.  A relationship counselor who had a strict policy of only serving
    straight couples notes the significant increase of LGBTQ people
    moving into the town.

[10](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#eip-525-solution).

Does the earnings gap between the average wages of females and the
average wages of males prove labor market discrimination? Why or why
not?

[11](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-14#eip-idm601357264-solution).

If immigration is reduced, what is the impact on the wage for
low-skilled labor? Explain.
