## 15.2 The Poverty Trap

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the poverty trap, noting how government programs impact it
-   Identify potential issues in government programs that seek to reduce
    poverty
-   Calculate a budget constraint line that represents the poverty trap

Can you give people too much help, or the wrong kind of help? When
people are provided with food, shelter, healthcare, income, and other
necessities, assistance may reduce their incentive to work, particularly
if their work is likely to offer low wages and reduce government
assistance. Consider a program to fight poverty that works in this
reasonable-sounding manner: the government provides assistance to the
those who need it, but as the recipients earn income to support
themselves, the government reduces the level of assistance it provides.
With such a program, every time a person earns \$100, they lose \$100 in
government support. As a result, the person experiences no net gain for
working. Economists call this problem the poverty trap.

Consider the situation a single-parent family faces. [Figure
15.3](#CNX_Econ_C14_002) illustrates a single mother (earning \$8 an
hour) with two children. First, consider the labor-leisure budget
constraint that this family faces in a situation without government
assistance. On the horizontal axis is hours of leisure (or time spent
with family responsibilities) increasing in quantity from left to right.
Also on the horizontal axis is the number of hours at paid work, going
from zero hours on the right to the maximum of 2,500 hours on the left.
On the vertical axis is the amount of income per year rising from low to
higher amounts of income. The budget constraint line shows that at zero
hours of leisure and 2,500 hours of work, the maximum amount of income
is \$20,000 (\$8 × 2,500 hours). At the other extreme of the budget
constraint line, an individual would work zero hours, earn zero income,
but enjoy 2,500 hours of leisure. At point A on the budget constraint
line, by working 40 hours a week, 50 weeks a year, the
utility-maximizing choice is to work a total of 2,000 hours per year and
earn \$16,000.

Now suppose that a government antipoverty program guarantees every
family with a single mother and two children \$18,000 in income. This is
represented on the graph by a horizontal line at \$18,000. With this
program, each time the mother earns \$1,000, the government will deduct
\$1,000 of its support. [Table 15.3](#ch14mod02_tab03) shows what will
happen at each combination of work and government support.

![](media/rId25.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.795in"}

Figure 15.3 The Poverty Trap in Action The original choice is 500 hours
of leisure, 2,000 hours of work at point A, and income of \$16,000. With
a guaranteed income of \$18,000, this family would receive \$18,000
whether it provides zero hours of work or 2,000 hours of work. Only if
the family provides, say, 2,300 hours of work does its income rise above
the guaranteed level of \$18,000---and even then, the marginal gain to
income from working many hours is small.

Table 15.3 Total Income at Various Combinations of Work and Support

The new budget line, with the antipoverty program in place, is the
horizontal and heavy line that is flat at \$18,000. If the mother does
not work at all, she receives \$18,000, all from the government. If she
works full time, giving up 40 hours per week with her children, she
still ends up with \$18,000 at the end of the year. Only if she works
2,300 hours in the year---which is an average of 44 hours per week for
50 weeks a year---does household income rise to \$18,400. Even in this
case, all of her year's work means that household income rises by only
\$400 over the income she would receive if she did not work at all. She
would need to work 50 hours a week to reach \$20,800.

The poverty trap is even stronger than this simplified example shows,
because a working mother will have extra expenses like clothing,
transportation, and child care that a nonworking mother will not face,
making the economic gains from working even smaller. Moreover, those who
do not work fail to build up job experience and contacts, which makes
working in the future even less likely.

To reduce the poverty trap the government could design an antipoverty
program so that, instead of reducing government payments by \$1 for
every \$1 earned, the government would reduce payments by some smaller
amount instead. Imposing requirements for work as a condition of
receiving benefits and setting a time limit on benefits can also reduce
the harshness of the poverty trap.

[Figure 15.4](#CNX_Econ_C14_003) illustrates a government program that
guarantees \$18,000 in income, even for those who do not work at all,
but then reduces this amount by 50 cents for each \$1 earned. The new,
higher budget line in [Figure 15.4](#CNX_Econ_C14_003) shows that, with
this program, additional hours of work will bring some economic gain.
Because of the reduction in government income when an individual works,
an individual earning \$8.00 will really net only \$4.00 per hour. The
vertical intercept of this higher budget constraint line is at \$28,000
(\$18,000 + 2,500 hours × \$4.00 = \$28,000). The horizontal intercept
is at the point on the graph where \$18,000 and 2500 hours of leisure is
set. [Table 15.4](#ch14mod02_tab04) shows the total income differences
with various choices of labor and leisure.

However, this type of program raises other issues. First, even if it
does not eliminate the incentive to work by reducing government payments
by \$1 for every \$1 earned, enacting such a program may still reduce
the incentive to work. At least some people who would be working 2,000
hours each year without this program might decide to work fewer hours
but still end up with more income---that is, their choice on the new
budget line would be like S, above and to the right of the original
choice P. Of course, others may choose a point like R, which involves
the same amount of work as P, or even a point to the left of R that
involves more work.

The second major issue is that when the government phases out its
support payments more slowly, the antipoverty program costs more money.
Still, it may be preferable in the long run to spend more money on a
program that retains a greater incentive to work, rather than spending
less money on a program that nearly eliminates any gains from working.

![](media/rId28.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="3.225in"}

Figure 15.4 Loosening the Poverty Trap: Reducing Government Assistance
by 50 Cents for Every \$1 Earned On the original labor-leisure
opportunity set, the lower, downward-sloping budget set, the preferred
choice P is 500 hours of leisure and \$16,000 of income. Then, the
government created an antipoverty program that guarantees \$18,000 in
income even to those who work zero hours, shown by the hoizontal dashed
line. In addition, every \$1 earned means phasing out 50 cents of
benefits at \$18,000. This program leads to the higher budget set, which
the diagram shows. The hope is that this program will provide incentives
to work the same or more hours, despite receiving income assistance.
However, it is possible that the recipients will choose a point on the
new budget set like S, with less work, more leisure, and greater income,
or a point like R, with the same work and greater income.

Table 15.4 The Labor-Leisure Tradeoff with Assistance Reduced by 50
Cents for Every Dollar Earned

The next module will consider a variety of government support programs
focused specifically on people experiencing poverty, including welfare,
SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program), Medicaid, and the
earned income tax credit (EITC). Although these programs vary from state
to state, it is generally a true statement that in many states from the
1960s into the 1980s, if poor people worked, their level of income
barely rose---or did not rise at all---after factoring in the reduction
in government support payments. The following Work It Out feature shows
how this happens.
