## 15.4 Income Inequality: Measurement and Causes

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the distribution of income, and analyze the sources of
    income inequality in a market economy
-   Measure income distribution in quintiles
-   Calculate and graph a Lorenz curve
-   Show income inequality through demand and supply diagrams

Poverty levels can be subjective based on the overall income levels of a
country. Typically a government measures poverty based on a percentage
of the median income. Income inequality, however, has to do with the
distribution of that income, in terms of which group receives the most
or the least income. Income inequality involves comparing those with
high incomes, middle incomes, and low incomes---not just looking at
those below or near the poverty line. In turn, measuring income
inequality means dividing the population into various groups and then
comparing the groups, a task that we can be carry out in several ways,
as the next Clear It Up feature shows.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### How do you separate poverty and income inequality? {#how-do-you-separate-poverty-and-income-inequality .Heading4Grey}

Poverty can change even when inequality does not move at all. Imagine a
situation in which income for everyone in the population declines by
10%. Poverty would rise, since a greater share of the population would
now fall below the poverty line. However, inequality would be the same,
because everyone suffered the same proportional loss. Conversely, a
general rise in income levels over time would keep inequality the same,
but reduce poverty.

It is also possible for income inequality to change without affecting
the poverty rate. Imagine a situation in which a large number of people
who already have high incomes increase their incomes by even more.
Inequality would rise as a result---but the number of people below the
poverty line would remain unchanged.

Why did inequality of household income increase in the United States in
recent decades? A trend toward greater income inequality has occurred in
many countries around the world, although the effect has been more
powerful in the U.S. economy. Economists have focused their explanations
for the increasing inequality on two factors that changed more or less
continually from the 1970s into the 2000s. One set of explanations
focuses on the changing shape of American households. The other focuses
on greater inequality of wages, what some economists call "winner take
all" labor markets. We will begin with how we measure inequality, and
then consider the explanations for growing inequality in the United
States.

### Measuring Income Distribution by Quintiles

One common way of measuring income inequality is to rank all households
by income, from lowest to highest, and then to divide all households
into five groups with equal numbers of people, known as quintiles. This
calculation allows for measuring the distribution of income among the
five groups compared to the total. The first quintile is the lowest
fifth or 20%, the second quintile is the next lowest, and so on. We can
measure income inequality by comparing what share of the total income
each quintile earns.

U.S. income distribution by quintile appears in [Table
15.5](#ch14mod04_tab07). In 2020, for example, the bottom quintile of
the income distribution received 3.2% of income; the second quintile
received 8.1%; the third quintile, 14.0%; the fourth quintile, 22.6%;
and the top quintile, 52.2%. The final column of [Table
15.5](#ch14mod04_tab07) shows what share of income went to households in
the top 5% of the income distribution: 23.0% in 2020. Over time, from
the late 1960s to the early 1980s, the top fifth of the income
distribution typically received between about 43% to 44% of all income.
The share of income that the top fifth received then begins to rise.
Census Bureau researchers trace, much of this increase in the share of
income going to the top fifth to an increase in the share of income
going to the top 5%. The quintile measure shows how income inequality
has increased in recent decades.

Table 15.5 Share of Aggregate Income Received by Each Fifth and Top 5%
of Households, 1967--2020 (Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/income-poverty/historical-income-households.html,
Table H-1, All Races.)

It can also be useful to divide the income distribution in ways other
than quintiles; for example, into tenths or even into percentiles (that
is, hundredths). A more detailed breakdown can provide additional
insights. For example, the last column of [Table 15.5](#ch14mod04_tab07)
shows the income received by the top 5% of the income distribution.
Between 1980 and 2020, the share of income going to the top 5% increased
by 6.5 percentage points (from 16.5% in 1980 to 23.0% in 2020). From
1980 to 2020 the share of income going to the top quintile increased by
8.1 percentage points (from 44.1% in 1980 to 52.2% in 2013). Thus, the
top 20% of householders (the fifth quintile) received over half (51%) of
all the income in the United States in 2020.

### Lorenz Curve

We can present the data on income inequality in various ways. For
example, you could draw a bar graph that showed the share of income
going to each fifth of the income distribution. [Figure
15.8](#CNX_Econ_C14_004) presents an alternative way of showing
inequality data in a Lorenz curve. This curve shows the cumulative share
of population on the horizontal axis and the cumulative percentage of
total income received on the vertical axis.

![](media/rId28.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.28in"}

Figure 15.8 The Lorenz Curve A Lorenz curve graphs the cumulative shares
of income received by everyone up to a certain quintile. The income
distribution in 1980 was closer to the perfect equality line than the
income distribution in 2020---that is, the U.S. income distribution
became more unequal over time.

Every Lorenz curve diagram begins with a line sloping up at a 45-degree
angle. We show it as a dashed line in [Figure 15.8](#CNX_Econ_C14_004).
The points along this line show what perfect equality of the income
distribution looks like. It would mean, for example, that the bottom 20%
of the income distribution receives 20% of the total income, the bottom
40% gets 40% of total income, and so on. The other lines reflect actual
U.S. data on inequality for 1980 and 2020.

The trick in graphing a Lorenz curve is that you must change the shares
of income for each specific quintile, which we show in the first and
third columns of numbers in [Table 15.6](#ch14mod04_tab08), into
cumulative income, which we show in the second and fourth columns of
numbers. For example, the bottom 40% of the cumulative income
distribution will be the sum of the first and second quintiles; the
bottom 60% of the cumulative income distribution will be the sum of the
first, second, and third quintiles, and so on. The final entry in the
cumulative income column needs to be 100%, because by definition, 100%
of the population receives 100% of the income.

Table 15.6 Calculating the Lorenz Curve

In a Lorenz curve diagram, a more unequal distribution of income will
loop farther down and away from the 45-degree line, while a more equal
distribution of income will move the line closer to the 45-degree line.
[Figure 15.8](#CNX_Econ_C14_004) illustrates the greater inequality of
the U.S. income distribution between 1980 and 2020 because the Lorenz
curve for 2020 is farther from the 45-degree line than the Lorenz curve
for 1980. The Lorenz curve is a useful way of presenting the quintile
data that provides an image of all the quintile data at once. The next
Clear It Up feature shows how income inequality differs in various
countries compared to the United States.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-1 .Heading3Grey}

#### How does economic inequality vary around the world? {#how-does-economic-inequality-vary-around-the-world .Heading4Grey}

The U.S. economy has a relatively high degree of income inequality by
global standards. As [Table 15.7](#ch14mod04_tab09) shows, based on a
variety of national surveys for a selection of years in the second
decade of this century, the U.S. economy has greater inequality than
Germany (along with most Western European countries). The region of the
world with the highest level of income inequality is Latin America,
illustrated in the numbers for Brazil and Mexico. The level of
inequality in the United States is higher than in some of the low-income
countries of the world, like India and Nigeria, as well as in some
middle-income countries, like China and Russia.

Table 15.7 Income Distribution in Select Countries (Source: U.S. data
from U.S. Census Bureau Table H-1. Other data from The World Bank
Poverty and Inequality Data Base,
https://datatopics.worldbank.org/world-development-indicators/themes/poverty-and-inequality.html)

Â 

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/inequality/) to watch a video
of wealth inequality across the world.

### Causes of Growing Inequality: The Changing Composition of American Households

In 1970, 41% of married women were in the labor force, but by 2019,
according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 58.6% of married women were
in the labor force. One result of this trend is that more households
have two earners. Moreover, it has become more common for one high
earner to marry another high earner. A few decades ago, the common
pattern featured a man with relatively high earnings, such as an
executive or a doctor, marrying a woman who did not earn as much, like a
secretary or a nurse. Often, the woman would leave paid employment, at
least for a few years, to raise a family. However, now doctors are
marrying doctors and executives are marrying executives, and mothers
with high-powered careers are often returning to work while their
children are quite young. This pattern of households with two high
earners tends to increase the proportion of high-earning households.

According to data in the National Journal, even as two-earner couples
have increased, so have single-parent households. Of all U.S. families,
in 2021, about 23% were headed by single mothers. The poverty rate among
single-parent households tends to be relatively high.

These changes in family structure, including the growth of single-parent
families who tend to be at the lower end of the income distribution, and
the growth of two-career high-earner couples near the top end of the
income distribution, account for roughly half of the rise in income
inequality across households in recent decades.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up-1 .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/US_wealth) to watch a video
that illustrates the distribution of wealth in the United States.

### Causes of Growing Inequality: A Shift in the Distribution of Wages

Another factor behind the rise in U.S. income inequality is that
earnings have become less equal since the late 1970s. In particular, the
earnings of high-skilled labor relative to low-skilled labor have
increased. Winner-take-all labor markets result from changes in
technology, which have increased global demand for "stars,"---whether
the best CEO, doctor, basketball player, or actor. This global demand
pushes salaries far above productivity differences associated with
educational differences. One way to measure this change is to take
workers\' earnings with at least a four-year college bachelor's degree
(including those who went on and completed an advanced degree) and
divide them by workers\' earnings with only a high school degree. The
result is that those in the 25--34 age bracket with college degrees
earned about 1.85 times as much as high school graduates in 2020, up
from 1.59 times in 1995, according to U.S. Census data. Winner-take-all
labor market theory argues that the salary gap between the median and
the top 1 percent is not due to educational differences.

Economists use the demand and supply model to reason through the most
likely causes of this shift. According to the National Center for
Education Statistics, in recent decades, the supply of U.S. workers with
college degrees has increased substantially. For example, 840,000
four-year bachelor's degrees were conferred on Americans in 1970. In
2018--2019, 2.0 million such degrees were conferred---an increase of
over 138%. In [Figure 15.9](#CNX_Econ_C14_006), this shift in supply to
the right, from S~0~ to S~1~, by itself should result in a lower
equilibrium wage for high-skilled labor. Thus, we can explain the
increase in the price of high-skilled labor by a greater demand, like
the movement from D~0~ to D~1~. Evidently, combining both the increase
in supply and in demand has resulted in a shift from E~0~ to E~1~, and a
resulting higher wage.

![](media/rId40.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.71in"}

Figure 15.9 Why Would Wages Rise for High-Skilled Labor? The proportion
of workers attending college has increased in recent decades, so the
supply curve for high-skilled labor has shifted to the right, from S~0~
to S~1~. If the demand for high-skilled labor had remained at D~0~, then
this shift in supply would have led to lower wages for high-skilled
labor. However, the wages for high-skilled labor, especially if there is
a large global demand, have increased even with the shift in supply to
the right. The explanation must lie in a shift to the right in demand
for high-skilled labor, from D~0~ to D~1~. The figure shows how a
combination of the shift in supply, from S~0~ to S~1~, and the shift in
demand, from D~0~ to D~1~, led to both an increase in the quantity of
high-skilled labor hired and also to a rise in the wage for such labor,
from W~0~ to W~1~.

What factors would cause the demand for high-skilled labor to rise? The
most plausible explanation is that while the explosion in new
information and communications technologies over the last several
decades has helped many workers to become more productive, the benefits
have been especially great for high-skilled workers like top business
managers, consultants, and design professionals. The new technologies
have also helped to encourage globalization, the remarkable increase in
international trade over the last few decades, by making it more
possible to learn about and coordinate economic interactions all around
the world. In turn, the rising impact of foreign trade in the U.S.
economy has opened up greater opportunities for high-skilled workers to
sell their services around the world, and lower-skilled workers have to
compete with a larger supply of similarly skilled workers around the
globe.

We can view the market for high-skilled labor as a race between forces
of supply and demand. Additional education and on-the-job training will
tend to increase the high-skilled labor supply and to hold down its
relative wage. Conversely, new technology and other economic trends like
globalization tend to increase the demand for high-skilled labor and
push up its relative wage. We can view the greater inequality of wages
as a sign that demand for skilled labor is increasing faster than
supply. Alternatively, if the supply of lower skilled workers exceeds
the demand, then average wages in the lower quintiles of the income
distribution will decrease. The combination of forces in the
high-skilled and low-skilled labor markets leads to increased income
disparity.
