## 15.5 Government Policies to Reduce Income Inequality

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the arguments for and against government intervention in a
    market economy
-   Identify beneficial ways to reduce the economic inequality in a
    society
-   Show the tradeoff between incentives and income equality

No society should expect or desire complete equality of income at a
given point in time, for a number of reasons. First, most workers
receive relatively low earnings in their first few jobs, higher earnings
as they reach middle age, and then lower earnings after retirement.
Thus, a society with people of varying ages will have a certain amount
of income inequality. Second, people's preferences and desires differ.
Some are willing to work long hours to have income for large houses,
fast cars and computers, luxury vacations, and the ability to support
children and grandchildren.

These factors all imply that a snapshot of inequality in a given year
does not provide an accurate picture of how people's incomes rise and
fall over time. Even if we expect some degree of economic inequality at
any point in time, how much inequality should there be? There is also
the difference between income and wealth, as the following Clear It Up
feature explains.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### How do you measure wealth versus income inequality? {#how-do-you-measure-wealth-versus-income-inequality .Heading4Grey}

Income is a flow of money received, often measured on a monthly or an
annual basis. Wealth is the sum of the value of all assets, including
money in bank accounts, financial investments, a pension fund, and the
value of a home. In calculating wealth, one must subtract all debts,
such as debt owed on a home mortgage and on credit cards. A retired
person, for example, may have relatively little income in a given year,
other than a pension or Social Security. However, if that person has
saved and invested over time, the person's accumulated wealth can be
quite substantial.

In the United States, the wealth distribution is more unequal than the
income distribution, because differences in income can accumulate over
time to make even larger differences in wealth. However, we can measure
the degree of inequality in the wealth distribution with the same tools
we use to measure the inequality in the income distribution, like
quintile measurements. Once every three years the Federal Reserve Bank
publishes the *Survey of Consumer Finance* which reports a collection of
data on wealth.

Even if they cannot answer the question of how much inequality is too
much, economists can still play an important role in spelling out policy
options and tradeoffs. If a society decides to reduce the level of
economic inequality, it has three main sets of tools: redistribution
from those with high incomes to those with low incomes; trying to assure
that a ladder of opportunity is widely available; and a tax on
inheritance.

### Redistribution

Redistribution means taking income from those with higher incomes and
providing income to those with lower incomes. Earlier in this chapter,
we considered some of the key government policies that provide support
for people experiencing poverty: the welfare program TANF, the earned
income tax credit, SNAP, and Medicaid. If a reduction in inequality is
desired, these programs could receive additional funding.

The federal income tax, which is a progressive tax system designed in
such a way that the rich pay a higher percent in income taxes than the
poor, funds the programs. Data from household income tax returns in 2018
shows that the top 1% of households had an average income of \$1,679,000
per year in pre-tax income and paid an average federal tax rate of
25.4%. The effective income tax, which is total taxes paid divided by
total income (all sources of income such as wages, profits, interest,
rental income, and government transfers such as veterans' benefits), was
much lower. The effective tax paid by that top 1% of householders paid
was 20.4%, while the bottom two quintiles actually paid negative
effective income taxes, because of provisions like the earned income tax
credit. News stories occasionally report on a high-income person who has
managed to pay very little in taxes, but while such individual cases
exist, according to the Congressional Budget Office, the typical pattern
is that people with higher incomes pay a higher average share of their
income in federal income taxes.

Of course, the fact that some degree of redistribution occurs now
through the federal income tax and government antipoverty programs does
not settle the questions of how much redistribution is appropriate, and
whether more redistribution should occur.

### The Ladder of Opportunity

Economic inequality is perhaps most troubling when it is not the result
of effort or talent, but instead is determined by the circumstances
under which a child grows up. One child attends a well-run grade school
and high school and heads on to college, while parents help out by
supporting education and other interests, paying for college, a first
car, and a first house, and offering work connections that lead to
internships and jobs. Another child attends a poorly run grade school,
barely makes it through a low-quality high school, does not go to
college, and lacks family and peer support. These two children may be
similar in their underlying talents and in the effort they put forth,
but their economic outcomes are likely to be quite different.

Public policy can attempt to build a ladder of opportunities so that,
even though all children will never come from identical families and
attend identical schools, each child has a reasonable opportunity to
attain an economic niche in society based on their interests, desires,
talents, and efforts. [Table 15.8](#ch14mod05_02_tab13) shows some of
those initiatives.

Table 15.8 Public Policy Initiatives

Some have called the United States a land of opportunity. Although the
general idea of a ladder of opportunity for all citizens continues to
exert a powerful attraction, specifics are often quite controversial.
Society can experiment with a wide variety of proposals for building a
ladder of opportunity, especially for those who otherwise seem likely to
start their lives in a disadvantaged position. The government needs to
carry out such policy experiments in a spirit of open-mindedness,
because some will succeed while others will not show positive results or
will cost too much to enact on a widespread basis.

### Inheritance Taxes

There is always a debate about inheritance taxes. It goes like this: Why
should people who have worked hard all their lives and saved up a
substantial nest egg not be able to give their money and possessions to
their children and grandchildren? In particular, it would seem
un-American if children were unable to inherit a family business or a
family home. Alternatively, many Americans are far more comfortable with
inequality resulting from high-income people who earned their money by
starting innovative new companies than they are with inequality
resulting from high-income people who have inherited money from rich
parents.

The United States does have an estate tax---that is, a tax imposed on
the value of an inheritance---which suggests a willingness to limit how
much wealth one can pass on as an inheritance. However, in 2022 the
estate tax applied only to those leaving inheritances of more than
\$12.06 million and thus applies to only a tiny percentage of those with
high levels of wealth.

### The Tradeoff between Incentives and Income Equality

Government policies to reduce poverty or to encourage economic equality,
if carried to extremes, can injure incentives for economic output. The
poverty trap, for example, defines a situation where guaranteeing a
certain level of income can eliminate or reduce the incentive to work.
An extremely high degree of redistribution, with very high taxes on the
rich, would be likely to discourage work and entrepreneurship. Thus, it
is common to draw the tradeoff between economic output and equality, as
[Figure 15.10](#CNX_Econ_C14_009) (a) shows. In this formulation, if
society wishes a high level of economic output, like point A, it must
also accept a high degree of inequality. Conversely, if society wants a
high level of equality, like point B, it must accept a lower level of
economic output because of reduced incentives for production.

This view of the tradeoff between economic output and equality may be
too pessimistic, and [Figure 15.10](#CNX_Econ_C14_009) (b) presents an
alternate vision. Here, the tradeoff between economic output and
equality first slopes up, in the vicinity of choice C, suggesting that
certain programs might increase both output and economic equality. For
example, the policy of providing free public education has an element of
redistribution, since the value of the public schooling received by
children of low-income families is clearly higher than what low-income
families pay in taxes. A well-educated population, however, is also an
enormously powerful factor in providing the skilled workers of tomorrow
and helping the economy to grow and expand. In this case, equality and
economic growth may complement each other.

Moreover, policies to diminish inequality and soften the hardship of
poverty may sustain political support for a market economy. After all,
if society does not make some effort toward reducing inequality and
poverty, the alternative might be that people would rebel against market
forces. Citizens might seek economic security by demanding that their
legislators pass laws forbidding employers from ever laying off workers
or reducing wages, or laws that would impose price floors and price
ceilings and shut off international trade. From this viewpoint, policies
to reduce inequality may help economic output by building social support
for allowing markets to operate.

![](media/rId36.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.495in"}

Figure 15.10 The Tradeoff between Incentives and Economic Equality (a)
Society faces a trade-off where any attempt to move toward greater
equality, like moving from choice A to B, involves a reduction in
economic output. (b) Situations can arise like point C, where it is
possible both to increase equality and also to increase economic output,
to a choice like D. It may also be possible to increase equality with
little impact on economic output, like the movement from choice D to E.
However, at some point, too aggressive a push for equality will tend to
reduce economic output, as in the shift from E to F.

The tradeoff in [Figure 15.10](#CNX_Econ_C14_009) (b) then flattens out
in the area between points D and E, which reflects the pattern that a
number of countries that provide similar levels of income to their
citizens---the United States, Canada, European Union nations, Japan, and
Australia---have different levels of inequality. The pattern suggests
that countries in this range could choose a greater or a lesser degree
of inequality without much impact on economic output. Only if these
countries push for a much higher level of equality, like at point F,
will they experience the diminished incentives that lead to lower levels
of economic output. In this view, while a danger always exists that an
agenda to reduce poverty or inequality can be poorly designed or pushed
too far, it is also possible to discover and design policies that
improve equality and do not injure incentives for economic output by
very much---or even improve such incentives.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Occupy Wall Street {#occupy-wall-street .Heading4Grey}

The Occupy movement took on a life of its own over the last few months
of 2011, bringing to light issues that many people faced on the lower
end of the income distribution. The contents of this chapter indicate
that there is a significant amount of income inequality in the United
States. The question is: What should be done about it?

The 2008-2009 Great Recession caused unemployment to rise and incomes to
fall. Many people attribute the recession to mismanagement of the
financial system by bankers and financial managers---those in the 1% of
the income distribution---but those in lower quintiles bore the greater
burden of the recession through unemployment. This seemed to present the
picture of inequality in a different light: the group that seemed
responsible for the recession was not the group that seemed to bear the
burden of the decline in output. A burden shared can bring a society
closer together. A burden pushed off onto others can polarize it.

On one level, the problem with trying to reduce income inequality comes
down to whether you still believe in the American Dream. If you believe
that one day you will have your American Dream---a large income, large
house, happy family, or whatever else you would like to have in
life---then you do not necessarily want to prevent anyone else from
living out their dream. You certainly would not want to run the risk
that someone would want to take part of your dream away from you. Thus,
there is some reluctance to engage in a redistributive policy to reduce
inequality.

However, when those for whom the likelihood of living the American Dream
is very small are considered, there are sound arguments in favor of
trying to create greater balance. As the text indicated, a little more
income equality, gained through long-term programs like increased
education and job training, can increase overall economic output. Then
everyone is made better off, and the 1% will not seem like such a small
group any more.
