![](media/rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.275in"}

Figure 15.1 Occupying Wall Street On September 17, 2011, Occupy Wall
Street began in New York City's Wall Street financial district. (Credit:
modification of "Occupy Wall Street Day 2 2011 Shankbone" by David
Shankbone/Flickr Creative Commons, CC BY 2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   Drawing the Poverty Line
-   The Poverty Trap
-   The Safety Net
-   Income Inequality: Measurement and Causes
-   Government Policies to Reduce Income Inequality

## Introduction to Poverty and Economic Inequality

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Occupy Wall Street {#occupy-wall-street .Heading4Grey}

In September 2011, a group of protesters gathered in Zuccotti Park in
New York City to decry what they perceived as increasing social and
economic inequality in the United States. Calling their protest "Occupy
Wall Street," they argued that the concentration of wealth among the
richest 1% in the United States was both economically unsustainable and
inequitable, and needed to be changed. The protest then spread to other
major cities, and the Occupy movement was born.

Why were people so upset? How much wealth is concentrated among the top
1% in our society? How did they acquire so much wealth? These are very
real, very important questions in the United States now, and this
chapter on poverty and economic inequality will help us address the
causes behind this sentiment.

The labor markets that determine the pay that workers receive do not
take into account how much income a family needs for food, shelter,
clothing, and health care. Market forces do not worry about what happens
to families when a major local employer goes out of business. Market
forces do not take time to contemplate whether those who are earning
higher incomes should pay an even higher share of taxes.

However, labor markets do create considerable income inequalities. In
2020, the median American household income was \$67,521 (the median is
the level where half of all families had more than that level and half
had less). For family households, the median was \$86,372; for
non-family households, it was \$40,464. The Census Bureau also reported
that in 2020, there were 37.2 million people living in poverty,
representing 11.4% of the population. Think about a family of
three---perhaps a single mother with two children---attempting to pay
for the basics of life on perhaps \$17,916 per year. After paying for
rent, healthcare, clothing, and transportation, such a family might have
\$6,000 to spend on food. Spread over 365 days, the food budget for the
entire family would be about \$17 per day. To put this in perspective,
most cities have restaurants where \$17 will buy you an appetizer for
one.

This chapter explores how the U.S. government defines poverty, the
balance between assisting the poor without discouraging work, and how
federal antipoverty programs work. It also discusses income
inequality---how economists measure inequality, why inequality has
changed in recent decades, the range of possible government policies to
reduce inequality, and the danger of a tradeoff that too great a
reduction in inequality may reduce incentives for producing output.
