## 17.1 How Businesses Raise Financial Capital

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Describe financial capital and how it relates to profits
-   Discuss the purpose and process of borrowing, bonds, and corporate
    stock
-   Explain how firms choose between sources of financial capital

Firms often make decisions that involve spending money in the present
and expecting to earn profits in the future. Examples include when a
firm buys a machine that will last 10 years, or builds a new plant that
will last for 30 years, or starts a research and development project.
Firms can raise the financial capital they need to pay for such projects
in four main ways: (1) from early-stage investors; (2) by reinvesting
profits; (3) by borrowing through banks or bonds; and (4) by selling
stock. When business owners choose financial capital sources, they also
choose how to pay for them.

### Early-Stage Financial Capital

Firms that are just beginning often have an idea or a prototype for a
product or service to sell, but few customers, or even no customers at
all, and thus are not earning profits. Such firms face a difficult
problem when it comes to raising financial capital: How can a firm that
has not yet demonstrated any ability to earn profits pay a rate of
return to financial investors?

For many small businesses, the original source of money is the business
owner. Someone who decides to start a restaurant or a gas station, for
instance, might cover the startup costs by dipping into their own bank
account, or by borrowing money (perhaps using a home as collateral).
Alternatively, many cities have a network of well-to-do individuals,
known as "angel investors," who will put their own money into small new
companies at an early development stage, in exchange for owning some
portion of the firm.

Venture capital firms make financial investments in new companies that
are still relatively small in size, but that have potential to grow
substantially. These firms gather money from a variety of individual or
institutional investors, including banks, institutions like college
endowments, insurance companies that hold financial reserves, and
corporate pension funds. Venture capital firms do more than just supply
money to small startups. They also provide advice on potential products,
customers, and key employees. Typically, a venture capital fund invests
in a number of firms, and then investors in that fund receive returns
according to how the fund as a whole performs.

The amount of money invested in venture capital fluctuates substantially
from year to year: as one example, venture capital firms invested more
than \$48.3 billion in 2014, according to the National Venture Capital
Association. All early-stage investors realize that the majority of
small startup businesses will never hit it big; many of them will go out
of business within a few months or years. They also know that getting in
on the ground floor of a few huge successes like a Netflix or an
Amazon.com can make up for multiple failures. Therefore, early-stage
investors are willing to take large risks in order to position
themselves to gain substantial returns on their investment.

### Profits as a Source of Financial Capital

If firms are earning profits (their revenues are greater than costs),
they can choose to reinvest some of these profits in equipment,
structures, and research and development. For many established
companies, reinvesting their own profits is one primary source of
financial capital. Companies and firms just getting started may have
numerous attractive investment opportunities, but few current profits to
invest. Even large firms can experience a year or two of earning low
profits or even suffering losses, but unless the firm can find a steady
and reliable financial capital source so that it can continue making
real investments in tough times, the firm may not survive until better
times arrive. Firms often need to find financial capital sources other
than profits.

### Borrowing: Banks and Bonds

When a firm has a record of at least earning significant revenues, and
better still of earning profits, the firm can make a credible promise to
pay interest, and so it becomes possible for the firm to borrow money.
Firms have two main borrowing methods: banks and bonds.

A bank loan for a firm works in much the same way as a loan for an
individual who is buying a car or a house. The firm borrows an amount of
money and then promises to repay it, including some rate of interest,
over a predetermined period of time. If the firm fails to make its loan
payments, the bank (or banks) can often take the firm to court and
require it to sell its buildings or equipment to make the loan payments.

Another source of financial capital is a bond. A bond is a financial
contract: a borrower agrees to repay the amount that it borrowed and
also an interest rate over a period of time in the future. A corporate
bond is issued by firms, but bonds are also issued by various levels of
government. For example, a municipal bond is issued by cities, a state
bond by U.S. states, and a Treasury bond by the federal government
through the U.S. Department of the Treasury. A bond specifies an amount
that one will borrow, the interest rate that one will pay, and the time
until repayment.

A large company, for example, might issue bonds for \$10 million. The
firm promises to make interest payments at an annual rate of 8%, or
\$800,000 per year and then, after 10 years, will repay the \$10 million
it originally borrowed. When a firm issues bonds, it may choose to issue
many bonds in smaller amounts that together reach the total amount it
wishes to raise. A firm that seeks to borrow \$50 million by issuing
bonds, might actually issue 10,000 bonds of \$5,000 each. In this way,
an individual investor could, in effect, loan the firm \$5,000, or any
multiple of that amount. Anyone who owns a bond and receives the
interest payments is called a bondholder. If a firm issues bonds and
fails to make the promised interest payments, the bondholders can take
the firm to court and require it to pay, even if the firm needs to raise
the money by selling buildings or equipment. However, there is no
guarantee the firm will have sufficient assets to pay off the bonds. The
bondholders may recoup only a portion of what they loaned the firm.

Bank borrowing is more customized than issuing bonds, so it often works
better for relatively small firms. The bank can get to know the firm
extremely well---often because the bank can monitor sales and expenses
quite accurately by looking at deposits and withdrawals. Relatively
large and well-known firms often issue bonds instead. They use bonds to
raise new financial capital that pays for investments, or to raise
capital to pay off old bonds, or to buy other firms. However, the idea
that firms or individuals use banks for relatively smaller loans and
bonds for larger loans is not an ironclad rule: sometimes groups of
banks make large loans and sometimes relatively small and lesser-known
firms issue bonds.

### Corporate Stock and Public Firms

A corporation is a business that "incorporates"---that is owned by
shareholders that have limited liability for the company\'s debt but
share in its profits (and losses). Corporations may be private or
public, and may or may not have publicly traded stock. They may raise
funds to finance their operations or new investments by raising capital
through selling stock or issuing bonds.

Those who buy the stock become the firm\'s owners, or shareholders.
Stock represents firm ownership; that is, a person who owns 100% of a
company's stock, by definition, owns the entire company. The company\'s
stock is divided into shares. Corporate giants like IBM, AT&T, Ford,
General Electric, Microsoft, Merck, and Exxon all have millions of stock
shares. In most large and well-known firms, no individual owns a
majority of the stock shares. Instead, large numbers of
shareholders---even those who hold thousands of shares---each have only
a small slice of the firm\'s overall ownership.

When a large number of shareholders own a company, there are three
questions to ask:

1.  How and when does the company obtain money from its sale of stock?
2.  What rate of return does the company promise to pay when it sells
    stock?
3.  Who makes decisions in a company owned by a large number of
    shareholders?

First, a firm receives money from the stock sale only when the company
sells its own stock to the public (the public includes individuals,
mutual funds, insurance companies, and pension funds). We call a firm's
first stock sale to the public an initial public offering (IPO). The IPO
is important for two reasons. For one, the IPO, and any stock issued
thereafter, such as stock held as treasury stock (shares that a company
keeps in their own treasury) or new stock issued later as a secondary
offering, provides the funds to repay the early-stage investors, like
the angel investors and the venture capital firms. A venture capital
firm may have a 40% ownership in the firm. When the firm sells stock,
the venture capital firm sells its part ownership of the firm to the
public. A second reason for the importance of the IPO is that it
provides the established company with financial capital for
substantially expanding its operations.

However, most of the time when one buys and sells corporate stock the
firm receives no financial return at all. If you buy General Motors
stock, you almost certainly buy it from the current share owner, and
General Motors does not receive any of your money. This pattern should
not seem particularly odd. After all, if you buy a house, the current
owner receives your money, not the original house builder. Similarly,
when you buy stock shares, you are buying a small slice of the firm\'s
ownership from the existing owner---and the firm that originally issued
the stock is not a part of this transaction.

Second, when a firm decides to issue stock, it must recognize that
investors will expect to receive a rate of return. That rate of return
can come in two forms. A firm can make a direct payment to its
shareholders, called a dividend. Alternatively, a financial investor
might buy a share of stock in Wal-Mart for \$45 and then later sell it
to someone else for \$60, for \$15 gain. We call the increase in the
stock value (or of any asset) between when one buys and sells it a
capital gain.

Third: Who makes the decisions about when a firm will issue stock, or
pay dividends, or re-invest profits? To understand the answers to these
questions, it is useful to separate firms into two groups: private and
public.

A private company is frequently owned by the people who generally run it
on a day-to-day basis. Individuals can run a private company. We call
this a sole proprietorship. If a group runs it, we call it a
partnership. A private company can also be a corporation, but with no
publicly issued stock. A small law firm run by one person, even if it
employs some other lawyers, would be a sole proprietorship. Partners may
jointly own a larger law firm. Most private companies are relatively
small, but there are some large private corporations, with tens of
billions of dollars in annual sales, that do not have publicly issued
stock, such as farm products dealer Cargill, the Mars candy company, and
the Bechtel engineering and construction firm.

When a firm decides to sell stock, which financial investors can buy and
sell, we call it a public company. Shareholders own a public company.
Since the shareholders are a very broad group, often consisting of
thousands or even millions of investors, the shareholders vote for a
board of directors, who in turn hire top executives to run the firm on a
day-to-day basis. The more stock a shareholder owns, the more votes that
shareholder is entitled to cast for the company's board of directors.

In theory, the board of directors helps to ensure that the firm runs in
the interests of the true owners---the shareholders. However, the top
executives who run the firm have a strong voice in choosing the
candidates who will serve on their board of directors. After all, few
shareholders are knowledgeable enough or have enough personal incentive
to spend energy and money nominating alternative board members.

### How Firms Choose between Financial Capital Sources

There are clear patterns in how businesses raise financial capital. We
can explain these patterns in terms of imperfect information, which as
we discussed in [Information, Risk, and
Insurance](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/16-introduction-to-information-risk-and-insurance),
is a situation where buyers and sellers in a market do not both have
full and equal information. Those who are actually running a firm will
almost always have more information about whether the firm is likely to
earn profits in the future than outside investors who provide financial
capital.

Any young startup firm is a risk. Some startup firms are only a little
more than an idea on paper. The firm's founders inevitably have better
information than anyone else about how hard they are willing to work,
and whether the firm is likely to succeed. When the founders invested
their own money into the firm, they demonstrate a belief in its
prospects. At this early stage, angel investors and venture capitalists
try to overcome the imperfect information, at least in part, by knowing
the managers and their business plan personally and by giving them
advice.

Accurate information is sometimes not available because corporate
governance, the name economists give to the institutions that are
supposed to watch over top executives, fails, as the following Clear It
Up feature on Lehman Brothers shows.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### How did lack of corporate governance lead to the Lehman Brothers failure? {#how-did-lack-of-corporate-governance-lead-to-the-lehman-brothers-failure .Heading4Grey}

In 2008, Lehman Brothers was the fourth largest U.S. investment bank,
with 25,000 employees. The firm had been in business for 164 years. On
September 15, 2008, Lehman Brothers filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection. There are many causes of the Lehman Brothers failure. One
area of apparent failure was the lack of oversight by the Board of
Directors to keep managers from undertaking excessive risk. We can
attribute part of the oversight failure, according to Tim Geithner's
April 10, 2010, testimony to Congress, to the Executive Compensation
Committee's emphasis on short-term gains without enough consideration of
the risks. In addition, according to the court examiner's report, the
Lehman Brother's Board of Directors paid too little attention to the
details of the operations of Lehman Brothers and also had limited
financial service experience.

The board of directors, elected by the shareholders, is supposed to be
the first line of corporate governance and oversight for top executives.
A second institution of corporate governance is the auditing firm the
company hires to review the company\'s financial records and certify
that everything looks reasonable. A third institution of corporate
governance is outside investors, especially large shareholders like
those who invest large mutual funds or pension funds. In the case of
Lehman Brothers, corporate governance failed to provide investors with
accurate financial information about the firm's operations.

As a firm becomes at least somewhat established and its strategy appears
likely to lead to profits in the near future, knowing the individual
managers and their business plans on a personal basis becomes less
important, because information has become more widely available
regarding the company's products, revenues, costs, and profits. As a
result, other outside investors who do not know the managers personally,
like bondholders and shareholders, are more willing to provide financial
capital to the firm.

At this point, a firm must often choose how to access financial capital.
It may choose to borrow from a bank, issue bonds, or issue stock. The
great disadvantage of borrowing money from a bank or issuing bonds is
that the firm commits to scheduled interest payments, whether or not it
has sufficient income. The great advantage of borrowing money is that
the firm maintains control of its operations and is not subject to
shareholders. Issuing stock involves selling off company ownership to
the public and becoming responsible to a board of directors and the
shareholders.

The benefit of issuing stock is that a small and growing firm increases
its visibility in the financial markets and can access large amounts of
financial capital for expansion, without worrying about repaying this
money. If the firm is successful and profitable, the board of directors
will need to decide upon a dividend payout or how to reinvest profits to
further grow the company. Issuing and placing stock is expensive,
requires the expertise of investment bankers and attorneys, and entails
compliance with reporting requirements to shareholders and government
agencies, such as the federal Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
