## Key Concepts and Summary

### 17.1 How Businesses Raise Financial Capital

Companies can raise early-stage financial capital in several ways: from
their owners' or managers' personal savings, or credit cards and from
private investors like angel investors and venture capital firms.

A bond is a financial contract through which a borrower agrees to repay
the amount that it borrowed. A bond specifies an amount that one will
borrow, the amounts that one will repay over time based on the interest
rate when the bond is issued, and the time until repayment. Corporate
bonds are issued by firms; municipal bonds are issued by cities, state
bonds by U.S. states, and Treasury bonds by the federal government
through the U.S. Department of the Treasury.

Stock represents firm ownership. A company\'s stock is divided into
shares. A firm receives financial capital when it sells stock to the
public. We call a company's first stock sale to the public the initial
public offering (IPO). However, a firm does not receive any funds when
one shareholder sells stock in the firm to another investor. One
receives the rate of return on stock in two forms: dividends and capital
gains.

A private company is usually owned by the people who run it on a
day-to-day basis, although hired managers can run it. We call a private
company owned and run by an individual a sole proprietorship, while a
firm owned and run by a group is a partnership. When a firm decides to
sell stock that financial investors can buy and sell, then the firm is
owned by its shareholders---who in turn elect a board of directors to
hire top day-to-day management. We call this a public company. Corporate
governance is the name economists give to the institutions that are
supposed to watch over top executives, though it does not always work.

### 17.2 How Households Supply Financial Capital

We can categorize all investments according to three key
characteristics: average expected return, degree of risk, and liquidity.
To obtain a higher rate of return, an investor must typically accept
either more risk or less liquidity. Banks are an example of a financial
intermediary, an institution that operates to coordinate supply and
demand in the financial capital market. Banks offer a range of accounts,
including checking accounts, savings accounts, and certificates of
deposit. Under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), banks
purchase insurance against the risk of a bank failure.

A typical bond promises the financial investor a series of payments over
time, based on the interest rate at the time the financial institution
issues the bond, and when the borrower repays it. Bonds that offer a
high rate of return but also a relatively high chance of defaulting on
the payments are called high-yield or junk bonds. The bond yield is the
rate of return that a bond promises to pay at the time of purchase. Even
when bonds make payments based on a fixed interest rate, they are
somewhat risky, because if interest rates rise for the economy as a
whole, an investor who owns bonds issued at lower interest rates is now
locked into the low rate and suffers a loss.

Changes in the stock price depend on changes in expectations about
future profits. Investing in any individual firm is somewhat risky, so
investors are wise to practice diversification, which means investing in
a range of companies. A mutual fund purchases an array of stocks and/or
bonds. An investor in the mutual fund then receives a return depending
on the fund\'s overall performance as a whole. A mutual fund that seeks
to imitate the overall behavior of the stock market is called an index
fund.

We can also regard housing and other tangible assets as forms of
financial investment, which pay a rate of return in the form of capital
gains. Housing can also offer a nonfinancial return---specifically, you
can live in it.

### 17.3 How to Accumulate Personal Wealth

It is extremely difficult, even for financial professionals, to predict
changes in future expectations and thus to choose the stocks whose price
will rise in the future. Most Americans can accumulate considerable
financial wealth if they follow two rules: complete significant
additional education and training after graduating from high school and
start saving money early in life.
