## 18.1 Voter Participation and Costs of Elections

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the significance of rational ignorance
-   Evaluate the impact of election expenses

In U.S. presidential elections over the last few decades, about 55% to
65% of voting-age citizens actually voted, according to the U.S. Census.
In congressional elections when there is no presidential race, or in
local elections, the turnout is typically lower, often less than half
the eligible voters. In other countries, the share of adults who vote is
often higher. For example, in national elections since the 1980s in
Germany, Spain, and France, about 75% to 80% of those of voting age cast
ballots. Even this total falls well short of 100%. Some countries have
laws that require voting, among them Australia, Belgium, Italy, Greece,
Turkey, Singapore, and most Latin American nations. At the time the
United States was founded, voting was mandatory in Virginia, Maryland,
Delaware, and Georgia. Even if the law can require people to vote,
however, no law can require that each voter cast an informed or a
thoughtful vote. Moreover, in the United States and in most countries
around the world, the freedom to vote has also typically meant the
freedom *not* to vote.

Why do people not vote? Perhaps they do not care too much about who
wins, or they are uninformed about who is running, or they do not
believe their vote will matter or change their lives in any way. These
reasons are probably tied together, since people who do not believe
their vote matters will not bother to become informed or care who wins.
Economists have suggested why a utility-maximizing person might
rationally decide not to vote or not to become informed about the
election. While a single vote may decide a few elections in very small
towns, in most elections of any size, the Board of Elections measures
the margin of victory in hundreds, thousands, or even millions of votes.
A rational voter will recognize that one vote is extremely unlikely to
make a difference. This theory of rational ignorance holds that people
will not vote if the costs of becoming informed and voting are too high,
or they feel their vote will not be decisive in the election.

In a 1957 work, *An Economic Theory of Democracy*, the economist Anthony
Downs stated the problem this way: "It seems probable that for a great
many citizens in a democracy, rational behavior excludes any investment
whatever in political information per se. No matter how significant a
difference between parties is revealed to the rational citizen by his
free information, or how uncertain he is about which party to support,
he realizes that his vote has almost no chance of influencing the
outcome... He will not even utilize all the free information available,
since assimilating it takes time." In his classic 1948 novel *Walden
Two*, the psychologist B. F. Skinner puts the issue even more succinctly
via one of his characters, who states: "The chance that one man's vote
will decide the issue in a national election...is less than the chance
that he will be killed on his way to the polls." The following Clear It
Up feature explores another aspect of the election process: spending.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### How much is too much to spend on an election? {#how-much-is-too-much-to-spend-on-an-election .Heading4Grey}

In the 2020 elections, it is estimated that spending for president,
Congress, and state and local offices amounted to \$14.4 billion, more
than twice what had been spent in 2016. The money raised went to the
campaigns, including advertising, fundraising, travel, and staff. Many
people worry that politicians spend too much time raising money and end
up entangled with special interest groups that make major donations.
Critics would prefer a system that restricts what candidates can spend,
perhaps in exchange for limited public campaign financing or free
television advertising time.

How much spending on campaigns is too much? Five billion dollars will
buy many potato chips, but in the U.S. economy, which was nearly \$21
trillion in 2020, the \$14.4 billion spent on political campaigns was
about 1/15th of 1% of the overall economy. Here is another way to think
about campaign spending. *Total* government spending programs in 2020,
including federal and state governments, was about \$8.8 trillion, so
the cost of choosing the people who would determine how to spend this
money was less than 2/10 of 1% of that. In the context of the enormous
U.S. economy, \$14.4 billion is not as much money as it sounds. U.S.
consumers spend almost \$2 billion per year on toothpaste and \$7
billion on hair care products. In 2020, Proctor and Gamble spent almost
\$5 billion on advertising. It may seem peculiar that one company's
spending on advertisements amounts to one third of what is spent on
presidential and other elections.

Whatever we believe about whether candidates and their parties spend too
much or too little on elections, the U.S. Supreme Court has placed
limits on how government can limit campaign spending. In a 1976
decision, *Buckley v. Valeo*, the Supreme Court emphasized that the
First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution specifies freedom of speech.
The federal government and states can offer candidates a voluntary deal
in which government makes some public financing available to candidates,
but only if the candidates agree to abide by certain spending limits. Of
course, candidates can also voluntarily agree to set certain spending
limits if they wish. However, government cannot forbid people or
organizations to raise and spend money above these limits if they
choose.

In 2002, Congress passed and President George W. Bush signed into law
the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (BCRA). The relatively
noncontroversial portions of the act strengthen the rules requiring full
and speedy disclosure of who contributes money to campaigns. However,
some controversial portions of the Act limit the ability of individuals
and groups to make certain kinds of political donations and they ban
certain kinds of advertising in the months leading up to an election.
Some called these bans into question after the release of two films:
Michael Moore's *Fahrenheit 9/11* and Citizens United's *Hillary: The
Movie*. At question was whether each film sought to discredit political
candidates for office too close to an election, in violation of the
BCRA. The lower courts found that Moore's film did not violate the Act,
while Citizens United's did. The fight reached the Supreme Court, as
*Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission*, saying that the First
Amendment protects the rights of corporations as well as individuals to
donate to political campaigns. The Court ruled, in a 5--4 decision, that
the spending limits were unconstitutional. This controversial decision,
which essentially allows unlimited contributions by corporations to
political action committees, overruled several previous decisions and
will likely be revisited in the future, due to the strength of the
public reaction. For now, it has resulted in a sharp increase in
election spending.

While many U.S. adults do not bother to vote in presidential elections,
more than half do. What motivates them? Research on voting behavior has
indicated that people who are more settled or more "connected" to
society tend to vote more frequently. According to the *Washington
Post*, more married people vote than single people. Those with a job
vote more than the unemployed. Those who have lived longer in a
neighborhood are more likely to vote than newcomers. Those who report
that they know their neighbors and talk to them are more likely to vote
than socially isolated people. Those with a higher income and level of
education are also more likely to vote. These factors suggest that
politicians are likely to focus more on the interests of married,
employed, well-educated people with at least a middle-class level of
income than on the interests of other groups. For example, those who
vote may tend to be more supportive of financial assistance for the
two-year and four-year colleges they expect their children to attend
than they are of medical care or public school education aimed at
families of unemployed people and those experiencing poverty.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/votergroups) to see a
breakdown of how different groups voted in 2020.

There have been many proposals to encourage greater voter turnout:
making it easier to register to vote, keeping the polls open for more
hours, or even moving Election Day to the weekend, when fewer people
need to worry about jobs or school commitments. However, such changes do
not seem to have caused a long-term upward trend in the number of people
voting. After all, casting an informed vote will always impose some
costs of time and energy. It is not clear how to strengthen people's
feeling of connectedness to society in a way that will lead to a
substantial increase in voter turnout. Without greater voter turnout,
however, politicians elected by the votes of 60% or fewer of the
population may not enact economic policy in the best interests of 100%
of the population. Meanwhile, countering a long trend toward making
voting easier, many states have recently enacted new voting laws that
critics say are actually barriers to voting. States have passed laws
reducing early voting, restricting groups who are organizing
get-out-the-vote efforts, enacted strict photo ID laws, as well as laws
that require showing proof of U.S. citizenship. The ACLU argues that
while these laws profess to prevent voter fraud, they are in effect
making it harder for individuals to cast their vote.
