## 18.3 Flaws in the Democratic System of Government

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Assess the median voter theory
-   Explain the voting cycle
-   Analyze the interrelationship between markets and government

Most developed countries today have a democratic system of government:
citizens express their opinions through votes and those votes affect the
direction of the country. The advantage of democracy over other systems
is that it allows everyone in a society an equal say and therefore may
reduce the possibility of a small group of wealthy oligarchs oppressing
the masses. There is no such thing as a perfect system, and democracy,
for all its popularity, is not without its problems, a few of which we
will examine here.

We sometimes sum up and oversimplify democracy in two words: "Majority
rule." When voters face three or more choices, however, then voting may
not always be a useful way of determining what the majority prefers.

As one example, consider an election in a state where 60% of the
population is liberal and 40% is conservative. If there are only two
candidates, one from each side, and if liberals and conservatives vote
in the same 60--40 proportions in which they are represented in the
population, then the liberal will win. What if the election ends up
including two liberal candidates and one conservative? It is possible
that the liberal vote will split and victory will go to the minority
party. In this case, the outcome does not reflect the majority's
preference.

Does the majority view prevail in the case of sugar quotas? Clearly
there are more sugar consumers in the United States than sugar
producers, but the U.S. domestic sugar lobby (www.sugarcane.org) has
successfully argued for protection against imports since 1789. By law,
therefore, U.S. cookie and candy makers must use 85% domestic sugar in
their products. Meanwhile quotas on imported sugar restrict supply and
keep the domestic sugar price up---raising prices for companies that use
sugar in producing their goods and for consumers. The European Union
allows sugar imports, and prices there are 40% lower than U.S. sugar
prices. Sugar-producing countries in the Caribbean repeatedly protest
the U.S. quotas at the World Trade Organization meetings, but each bite
of cookie, at present, costs you more than if there were no sugar lobby.
This case goes against the theory of the "median" voter in a democracy.
The median voter theory argues that politicians will try to match
policies to what pleases the median voter preferences. If we think of
political positions along a spectrum from left to right, the median
voter is in the middle of the spectrum. This theory argues that actual
policy will reflect "middle of the road." In the case of sugar lobby
politics, the *minority*, not the median, dominates policy.

Sometimes it is not even clear how to define the majority opinion. Step
aside from politics for a moment and think about a choice facing three
families (the Ortegas, the Schmidts, and the Alexanders) who are
planning to celebrate New Year's Day together. They agree to vote on the
menu, choosing from three entrees, and they agree that the majority vote
wins. With three families, it seems reasonable that one producing choice
will get a 2--1 majority. What if, however, their vote ends up looking
like [Table 18.1](#Table_18_01)?

Clearly, the three families disagree on their first choice. However, the
problem goes even deeper. Instead of looking at all three choices at
once, compare them two at a time. (See [Figure 18.2](#CNX_Econ_C18_001))
In a vote of turkey versus beef, turkey wins by 2--1. In a vote of beef
versus lasagna, beef wins 2--1. If turkey beats beef, and beef beats
lasagna, then it might seem only logical that turkey must also beat
lasagna. However, with the preferences, lasagna is preferred to turkey
by a 2--1 vote, as well. If lasagna is preferred to turkey, and turkey
beats beef, then surely it must be that lasagna also beats beef?
Actually, no. Beef beats lasagna. In other words, the majority view may
not win. Clearly, as any car salesperson will tell you, the way one
presents choices to us influences our decisions.

![](media/rId25.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.69in"}

Figure 18.2 A Voting Cycle Given these choices, voting will struggle to
produce a majority outcome. Turkey is favored over roast beef by 2--1
and roast beef is favored over lasagna by 2--1. If turkey beats roast
beef and roast beef beats lasagna, then it might seem that turkey must
beat lasagna, too. However, given these preferences, lasagna is favored
over turkey by 2--1.

Table 18.1 Circular Preferences

We call the situation in which Choice A is preferred by a majority over
Choice B, Choice B is preferred by a majority over Choice C, and Choice
C is preferred by a majority over Choice A a voting cycle. It is easy to
imagine sets of government choices---say, perhaps the choice between
increased defense spending, increased government spending on health
care, and a tax cut---in which a voting cycle could occur. The result
will be determined by the order in which interested parties present and
vote on choices, not by majority rule, because every choice is both
preferred to some alternative and also not preferred to another
alternative.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://www.fairvote.org/rcv#rcvbenefits) to read
about ranked choice voting, a preferential voting system.

### Where Is Government's Self-Correcting Mechanism?

When a firm produces a product no one wants to buy or produces at a
higher cost than its competitors, the firm is likely to suffer losses.
If it cannot change its ways, it will go out of business. This
self-correcting mechanism in the marketplace can have harsh effects on
workers or on local economies, but it also puts pressure on firms for
good performance.

Government agencies, however, do not sell their products in a market.
They receive tax dollars instead. They are not challenged by competitors
as are private-sector firms. If the U.S. Department of Education or the
U.S. Department of Defense is performing poorly, citizens cannot
purchase their services from another provider and drive the existing
government agencies into bankruptcy. If you are upset that the Internal
Revenue Service is slow in sending you a tax refund or seems unable to
answer your questions, you cannot decide to pay your income taxes
through a different organization. Of course, elected politicians can
assign new leaders to government agencies and instruct them to
reorganize or to emphasize a different mission. The pressure government
faces, however, to change its bureaucracy, to seek greater efficiency,
and to improve customer responsiveness is much milder than the threat of
being put out of business altogether.

This insight suggests that when government provides goods or services
directly, we might expect it to do so with less efficiency than private
firms---except in certain cases where the government agency may compete
directly with private firms. At the local level, for example, government
can provide directly services like garbage collection, using private
firms under contract to the government, or by a mix of government
employees competing with private firms.

### A Balanced View of Markets and Government

The British statesman Sir Winston Churchill (1874--1965) once wrote: "No
one pretends that democracy is perfect or all-wise. Indeed, it has been
said that democracy is the worst form of government except for all of
the other forms which have been tried from time to time." In that
spirit, the theme of this discussion is certainly not that we should
abandon democratic government. A practical student of public policy
needs to recognize that in some cases, like the case of well-organized
special interests or pork-barrel legislation, a democratic government
may seek to enact economically unwise projects or programs. In other
cases, by placing a low priority on the problems of those who are not
well organized or who are less likely to vote, the government may fail
to act when it could do some good. In these and other cases, there is no
automatic reason to believe that government will necessarily make
economically sensible choices.

"The true test of a first-rate mind is the ability to hold two
contradictory ideas at the same time," wrote the American author F.
Scott Fitzgerald (1896--1940). At this point in your study of
microeconomics, you should be able to go one better than Fitzgerald and
hold three somewhat contradictory ideas about the interrelationship
between markets and government in your mind at the same time.

First, markets are extraordinarily useful and flexible institutions
through which society can allocate its scarce resources. We introduced
this idea with the subjects of international trade and demand and supply
in other chapters and reinforced it in all the subsequent discussions of
how households and firms make decisions.

Second, markets may sometimes produce unwanted results. A short list of
the cases in which markets produce unwanted results includes monopoly
and other cases of imperfect competition, pollution, poverty and
inequality of incomes, discrimination, and failure to provide insurance.

Third, while government may play a useful role in addressing the
problems of markets, government action is also imperfect and may not
reflect majority views. Economists readily admit that, in settings like
monopoly or negative externalities, a potential role exists for
government intervention. However, in the real world, it is not enough to
point out that government action might be a good idea. Instead, we must
have some confidence that the government is likely to identify and carry
out the appropriate public policy. To make sensible judgments about
economic policy, we must see the strengths and weaknesses of both
markets and government. We must not idealize or demonize either
unregulated markets or government actions. Instead, consider the actual
strengths and weaknesses of real-world markets and real-world
governments.

These three insights seldom lead to simple or obvious political
conclusions. As the famous British economist Joan Robinson wrote some
decades ago: "\[E\]conomic theory, in itself, preaches no doctrines and
cannot establish any universally valid laws. It is a method of ordering
ideas and formulating questions." The study of economics is neither
politically conservative, nor moderate, nor liberal. There are
economists who are Democrats, Republicans, libertarians, socialists, and
members of every other political group you can name. Of course,
conservatives may tend to emphasize the virtues of markets and the
limitations of government, while liberals may tend to emphasize the
shortcomings of markets and the need for government programs. Such
differences only illustrate that the language and terminology of
economics is not limited to one set of political beliefs, but can be
used by all.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Chinese Tire Tariffs {#chinese-tire-tariffs .Heading4Grey}

In April 2009, the union representing U.S. tire manufacturing workers
filed a request with the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC),
asking it to investigate tire imports from China. Under U.S. trade law,
if imports from a country increase to the point that they cause market
disruption in the United States, as determined by the ITC, then it can
also recommend a remedy for this market disruption. In this case, the
ITC determined that from 2004 to 2008, U.S. tire manufacturers suffered
declines in production, financial health, and employment as a direct
result of increases in tire imports from China. The ITC recommended
placing an additional tax on tire imports from China. President Obama
and Congress agreed with the ITC recommendation, and in June 2009
tariffs on Chinese tires increased from 4% to 39%. In addition, tariffs
on Chinese tires increased further as part of President Trump's
increases on a broad range of Chinese products.

Why would U.S. consumers buy imported tires from China in the first
place? Most likely, because they are cheaper than tires produced
domestically or in other countries. Therefore, this tariff increase
should cause U.S. consumers to pay higher prices for tires, either
because Chinese tires are now more expensive, or because U.S. consumers
are pushed by the tariff to buy more expensive tires made by U.S.
manufacturers or those from other countries. In the end, this tariff
made U.S. consumers pay more for tires.

Was this tariff met with outrage expressed via social media, traditional
media, or mass protests? Were there "Occupy Wall Street-type"
demonstrations? The answer is a resounding "No". Most U.S. tire
consumers were likely unaware of the tariff increase, although they may
have noticed the price increase, which was between \$4 and \$13
depending on the type of tire. Tire consumers are also potential voters.
Conceivably, a tax increase, even a small one, might make voters
unhappy. However, voters probably realized that it was not worth their
time to learn anything about this issue or cast a vote based on it. They
probably thought their vote would not matter in determining the outcome
of an election or changing this policy.

Estimates of the impact of this tariff show it costs U.S. consumers
around \$1.11 billion annually. Of this amount, roughly \$817 million
ends up in the pockets of foreign tire manufacturers other than in
China, and the remaining \$294 million goes to U.S. tire manufacturers.
In other words, the tariff increase on Chinese tires may have saved
1,200 jobs in the domestic tire sector, but it cost 3,700 jobs in other
sectors, as consumers had to reduce their spending because they were
paying more for tires. People actually lost their jobs as a result of
this tariff. Workers in U.S. tire manufacturing firms earned about
\$40,000 in 2010. Given the number of jobs saved and the total cost to
U.S. consumers, the cost of saving one job amounted to \$926,500!

This tariff caused a net decline in U.S. social surplus. (We discuss
total surplus in the [Demand and
Supply](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-introduction-to-demand-and-supply)
chapter, and tariffs in the [Introduction to International
Trade](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/19-introduction-to-international-trade)
chapter.) Instead of saving jobs, it cost jobs, and those jobs that it
saved cost many times more than the people working in them could ever
hope to earn. Why would the government do this?

The chapter answers this question by discussing the influence special
interest groups have on economic policy. The steelworkers union, whose
members make tires, saw increasingly more members lose their jobs as
U.S. consumers consumed increasingly more cheap Chinese tires. By
definition, this union is relatively small but well organized,
especially compared to tire consumers. It stands to gain much for each
of its members, compared to what each tire consumer may have to give up
in terms of higher prices. Thus, the steelworkers union (joined by
domestic tire manufacturers) has not only the means but the incentive to
lobby economic policymakers and lawmakers. Given that U.S. tire
consumers are a large and unorganized group, if they even are a group,
it is unlikely they will lobby against higher tire tariffs. In the end,
lawmakers tend to listen to those who lobby them, even though the
results make for bad economic policy.
