## Key Concepts and Summary

### 18.1 Voter Participation and Costs of Elections

The theory of rational ignorance says voters will recognize that their
single vote is extremely unlikely to influence the outcome of an
election. As a consequence, they will choose to remain uninformed about
issues and not vote. This theory helps explain why voter turnout is so
low in the United States.

### 18.2 Special Interest Politics

Special interest politics arises when a relatively small group, called a
special interest group, each of whose members has a large interest in a
political outcome, devotes considerable time and energy to lobbying for
the group's preferred choice. Meanwhile, the large majority, each of
whose members has only a small interest in this issue, pays no
attention.

We define pork\--barrel spending as legislation whose benefits are
concentrated on a single district while the costs are spread widely over
the country. Logrolling refers to a situation in which two or more
legislators agree to vote for each other's legislation, which can then
encourage pork-barrel spending in many districts.

### 18.3 Flaws in the Democratic System of Government

Majority votes can run into difficulties when more than two choices
exist. A voting cycle occurs when, in a situation with at least three
choices, choice A is preferred by a majority vote to choice B, choice B
is preferred by a majority vote to choice C, and choice C is preferred
by a majority vote to choice A. In such a situation, it is impossible to
identify what the majority prefers. Another difficulty arises when the
vote is so divided that no choice receives a majority.

A practical approach to microeconomic policy will need to take a
realistic view of the specific strengths and weaknesses of markets as
well as government, rather than making the easy but wrong assumption
that either the market or government is always beneficial or always
harmful.
