## 19.3 Intra-industry Trade between Similar Economies

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Identify at least two advantages of intra-industry trading
-   Explain the relationship between economies of scale and
    intra-industry trade

Absolute and comparative advantages explain a great deal about global
trading patterns. For example, they help to explain the patterns that we
noted at the start of this chapter, like why you may be eating fresh
fruit from Chile or Mexico, or why lower productivity regions like
Africa and Latin America are able to sell a substantial proportion of
their exports to higher productivity regions like the European Union and
North America. Comparative advantage, however, at least at first glance,
does not seem especially well-suited to explain other common patterns of
international trade.

### The Prevalence of Intra-Industry Trade between Similar Economies

The theory of comparative advantage suggests that trade should happen
between economies with large differences in opportunity costs of
production. Roughly half of all U.S. trade involves shipping goods
between the fairly similar high-income economies of Japan, Canada, and
the United States. Furthermore, the trade has an important geographic
component---the biggest trading partners of the United States are Canada
and Mexico (see [Table 19.13](#Table_33_14)).

Table 19.13 Top Trading Partners (November 2021) (Source:
https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/highlights/toppartners.html)

Moreover, the theory of comparative advantage suggests that each economy
should specialize to a degree in certain products, and then exchange
those products. A high proportion of trade, however, is intra-industry
trade---that is, trade of goods within the same industry from one
country to another. For example, the United States produces and exports
autos and imports autos. [Table 19.14](#Table_33_15) shows some of the
largest categories of U.S. exports and imports. In all of these
categories, the United States is both a substantial exporter and a
substantial importer of goods from the same industry. In 2021, according
to the U.S. Census Bureau, the United States exported \$131 billion
worth of autos, and imported \$317 billion worth of autos. About 60% of
U.S. trade and 60% of European trade is intra-industry trade.

Table 19.14 Some Intra-Industry U.S. Exports and Imports in 2021
(Source: https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/data/index.html)

Why do similar high-income economies engage in intra-industry trade?
What can be the economic benefit of having workers of fairly similar
skills making cars, computers, machinery and other products which are
then shipped across the oceans to and from the United States, the
European Union, and Japan? There are two reasons: (1) The division of
labor leads to learning, innovation, and unique skills; and (2)
economies of scale.

### Gains from Specialization and Learning

Consider the category of machinery, where the U.S. economy has
considerable intra-industry trade. Machinery comes in many varieties, so
the United States may be exporting machinery for manufacturing with
wood, but importing machinery for photographic processing. The
underlying reason why a country like the United States, Japan, or
Germany produces one kind of machinery rather than another is usually
not related to U.S., German, or Japanese firms and workers having
generally higher or lower skills. It is just that, in working on very
specific and particular products, firms in certain countries develop
unique and different skills.

Specialization in the world economy can be very finely split. In fact,
recent years have seen a trend in international trade, which economists
call splitting up the value chain. The value chain describes how a good
is produced in stages. As indicated in the beginning of the chapter,
producing the iPhone involves designing and engineering the phone in the
United States, supplying parts from Korea, assembling the parts in
China, and advertising and marketing in the United States. Thanks in
large part to improvements in communication technology, sharing
information, and transportation, it has become easier to split up the
value chain. Instead of production in a single large factory, different
firms operating in various places and even different countries can
divide the value chain. Because firms split up the value chain,
international trade often does not involve nations trading whole
finished products like automobiles or refrigerators. Instead, it
involves shipping more specialized goods like, say, automobile
dashboards or the shelving that fits inside refrigerators.
Intra-industry trade between similar countries produces economic gains
because it allows workers and firms to learn and innovate on particular
products---and often to focus on very particular parts of the value
chain.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/iphoneassembly) for some
interesting information about the assembly of the iPhone.

### Economies of Scale, Competition, Variety

A second broad reason that intra-industry trade between similar nations
produces economic gains involves economies of scale. The concept of
economies of scale, as we introduced in [Production, Costs and Industry
Structure](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/7-introduction-to-production-costs-and-industry-structure),
means that as the scale of output goes up, average costs of production
decline---at least up to a point. [Figure 19.5](#CNX_Econ_C33_005)
illustrates economies of scale for a plant producing toaster ovens. The
horizontal axis of the figure shows the quantity of production by a
certain firm or at a certain manufacturing plant. The vertical axis
measures the average cost of production. Production plant S produces a
small level of output at 30 units and has an average cost of production
of \$30 per toaster oven. Plant M produces at a medium level of output
at 50 units, and has an average cost of production of \$20 per toaster
oven. Plant L produces 150 units of output with an average cost of
production of only \$10 per toaster oven. Although plant V can produce
200 units of output, it still has the same unit cost as Plant L.

In this example, a small or medium plant, like S or M, will not be able
to compete in the market with a large or a very large plant like L or V,
because the firm that operates L or V will be able to produce and sell
its output at a lower price. In this example, economies of scale operate
up to point L, but beyond point L to V, the additional scale of
production does not continue to reduce average costs of production.

![](media/rId34.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.17in"}

Figure 19.5 Economies of Scale Production Plant S, has an average cost
of production of \$30 per toaster oven. Production plant M has an
average cost of production of \$20 per toaster oven. Production plant L
has an average cost of production of only \$10 per toaster oven.
Production plant V still has an average cost of production of \$10 per
toaster oven. Thus, production plant M can produce toaster ovens more
cheaply than plant S because of economies of scale, and plants L or V
can produce more cheaply than S or M because of economies of scale.
However, the economies of scale end at an output level of 150. Plant V,
despite being larger, cannot produce more cheaply on average than plant
L.

The concept of economies of scale becomes especially relevant to
international trade when it enables one or two large producers to supply
the entire country. For example, a single large automobile factory could
probably supply all the cars consumers purchase in a smaller economy
like the United Kingdom or Belgium in a given year. However, if a
country has only one or two large factories producing cars, and no
international trade, then consumers in that country would have
relatively little choice between kinds of cars (other than the color of
the paint and other nonessential options). Little or no competition will
exist between different car manufacturers.

International trade provides a way to combine the lower average
production costs that come from economies of scale and still have
competition and variety for consumers. Large automobile factories in
different countries can make and sell their products around the world.
If General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler were the only players in the U.S.
automobile market, the level of competition and consumer choice would be
considerably lower than when U.S. carmakers must face competition from
Toyota, Honda, Suzuki, Fiat, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Volkswagen, Kia,
Hyundai, BMW, Subaru, and others. Greater competition brings with it
innovation and responsiveness to what consumers want. America's car
producers make far better cars now than they did several decades ago,
and much of the reason is competitive pressure, especially from East
Asian and European carmakers.

### Dynamic Comparative Advantage

The sources of gains from intra-industry trade between similar
economies---namely, the learning that comes from a high degree of
specialization and splitting up the value chain and from economies of
scale---do not contradict the earlier theory of comparative advantage.
Instead, they help to broaden the concept.

In intra-industry trade, climate or geography do not determine the level
of worker productivity. Even the general level of education or skill
does not determine it. Instead, how firms engage in specific learning
about specialized products, including taking advantage of economies of
scale determine the level of worker productivity. In this vision,
comparative advantage can be dynamic---that is, it can evolve and change
over time as one develops new skills and as manufacturers split the
value chain in new ways. This line of thinking also suggests that
countries are not destined to have the same comparative advantage
forever, but must instead be flexible in response to ongoing changes in
comparative advantage.
