## Key Concepts and Summary

### 2.1 How Individuals Make Choices Based on Their Budget Constraint

Economists see the real world as one of scarcity: that is, a world in
which people's desires exceed what is possible. As a result, economic
behavior involves tradeoffs in which individuals, firms, and society
must forgo something that they desire to obtain things that they desire
more. Individuals face the tradeoff of what quantities of goods and
services to consume. The budget constraint, which is the frontier of the
opportunity set, illustrates the range of available choices. The
relative price of the choices determines the slope of the budget
constraint. Choices beyond the budget constraint are not affordable.

Opportunity cost measures cost by what we forgo in exchange. Sometimes
we can measure opportunity cost in money, but it is often useful to
consider time as well, or to measure it in terms of the actual resources
that we must forfeit.

Most economic decisions and tradeoffs are not all-or-nothing. Instead,
they involve marginal analysis, which means they are about decisions on
the margin, involving a little more or a little less. The law of
diminishing marginal utility points out that as a person receives more
of something---whether it is a specific good or another resource---the
additional marginal gains tend to become smaller. Because sunk costs
occurred in the past and cannot be recovered, they should be disregarded
in making current decisions.

### 2.2 The Production Possibilities Frontier and Social Choices

A production possibilities frontier defines the set of choices society
faces for the combinations of goods and services it can produce given
the resources and the technology that are available. The shape of the
PPF is typically curved outward, rather than straight. Choices outside
the PPF are unattainable and choices inside the PPF are wasteful. Over
time, a growing economy will tend to shift the PPF outwards.

The law of diminishing returns holds that as increments of additional
resources are devoted to producing something, the marginal increase in
output will become increasingly smaller. All choices along a production
possibilities frontier display productive efficiency; that is, it is
impossible to use society's resources to produce more of one good
without decreasing production of the other good. The specific choice
along a production possibilities frontier that reflects the mix of goods
society prefers is the choice with allocative efficiency. The curvature
of the PPF is likely to differ by country, which results in different
countries having comparative advantage in different goods. Total
production can increase if countries specialize in the goods in which
they have comparative advantage and trade some of their production for
the remaining goods.

### 2.3 Confronting Objections to the Economic Approach

The economic way of thinking provides a useful approach to understanding
human behavior. Economists make the careful distinction between positive
statements, which describe the world as it is, and normative statements,
which describe how the world should be. Even when economics analyzes the
gains and losses from various events or policies, and thus draws
normative conclusions about how the world should be, the analysis of
economics is rooted in a positive analysis of how people, firms, and
governments actually behave, not how they should behave.
