## 20.1 Protectionism: An Indirect Subsidy from Consumers to Producers

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain protectionism and its three main forms
-   Analyze protectionism through concepts of demand and supply, noting
    its effects on equilibrium
-   Calculate the effects of trade barriers

When a government legislates policies to reduce or block international
trade it is engaging in protectionism. Protectionist policies often seek
to shield domestic producers and domestic workers from foreign
competition. Protectionism takes three main forms: tariffs, import
quotas, and nontariff barriers.

Recall from [International
Trade](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/19-introduction-to-international-trade)
that tariffs are taxes that governments impose on imported goods and
services. This makes imports more expensive for consumers, discouraging
imports. For example, in 2018, President Trump increased tariffs on
Chinese-manufactured goods by 2--25%, including TVs, monitors, desktop
PCs, smartwatches, and many other consumer goods. The intention behind
the policy was to shelter U.S. manufacturers from competition, helping
companies that operate domestically. China responded with tariffs on
American goods, launching a trade war. President Biden retained these
tariffs and considered additional ones, but as of August 2022, the
administration was considering changes designed to reduce inflation.

Another way to control trade is through import quotas, which are
numerical limitations on the quantity of products that a country can
import. For instance, during the early 1980s, the Reagan Administration
imposed a quota on the import of Japanese automobiles. In the 1970s,
many developed countries, including the United States, found themselves
with declining textile industries. Textile production does not require
highly skilled workers, so producers were able to set up lower-cost
factories in developing countries. In order to "manage" this loss of
jobs and income, the developed countries established an international
Multifiber Agreement that essentially divided the market for textile
exports between importers and the remaining domestic producers. The
agreement, which ran from 1974 to 2004, specified the exact quota of
textile imports that each developed country would accept from each
low-income country. A similar story exists for sugar imports into the
United States, which are still governed by quotas.

Nontariff barriers are all the other ways that a nation can draw up
rules, regulations, inspections, and paperwork to make it more costly or
difficult to import products. A rule requiring certain safety standards
can limit imports just as effectively as high tariffs or low import
quotas, for instance. There are also nontariff barriers in the form of
"rules-of-origin" regulations; these rules describe the "Made in Country
X" label as the one in which the last substantial change in the product
took place. A manufacturer wishing to evade import restrictions may try
to change the production process so that the last big change in the
product happens in their own country. For example, certain textiles are
made in the United States, shipped to other countries, combined with
textiles made in those other countries to make apparel---and then
re-exported back to the United States for a final assembly, to escape
paying tariffs or to obtain a "Made in the USA" label.

Despite import quotas, tariffs, and nontariff barriers, the share of
apparel sold in the United States that is imported rose from about half
in 1999 to about three-quarters today. According to the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS), estimated the number of U.S. jobs in textiles
and apparel fell 44% from 2007 to 2014, and will fall by another 25% by
2024. Even more U.S. textile industry jobs would have been lost without
tariffs. However, domestic jobs that are saved by import quotas come at
a cost. Because textile and apparel protectionism adds to the costs of
imports, consumers end up paying billions of dollars more for clothing
each year.

When the United States eliminates trade barriers in one area, consumers
spend the money they save on that product elsewhere in the economy.
Thus, while eliminating trade barriers in one sector of the economy will
likely result in some job loss in that sector, consumers will spend the
resulting savings in other sectors of the economy and hence increase the
number of jobs in those other sectors. Of course, workers in some of the
poorest countries of the world who would otherwise have jobs producing
textiles, would gain considerably if the United States reduced its
barriers to trade in textiles. That said, there are good reasons to be
wary about reducing barriers to trade. The 2012 and 2013 Bangladeshi
fires in textile factories, which resulted in a horrific loss of life,
present complications that our simplified analysis in the chapter will
not capture.

Realizing the compromises between nations that come about due to trade
policy, many countries came together in 1947 to form the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). (We'll cover the GATT in more
detail later in the chapter.) This agreement has since been superseded
by the World Trade Organization (WTO), whose membership includes about
150 nations and most of the world\'s economies. It is the primary
international mechanism through which nations negotiate their trade
rules---including rules about tariffs, quotas, and nontariff barriers.
The next section examines the results of such protectionism and develops
a simple model to show the impact of trade policy.

### Demand and Supply Analysis of Protectionism

To the non-economist, restricting imports may appear to be nothing more
than taking sales from foreign producers and giving them to domestic
producers. Other factors are at work, however, because firms do not
operate in a vacuum. Instead, firms sell their products either to
consumers or to other firms (if they are business suppliers), who are
also affected by the trade barriers. A demand and supply analysis of
protectionism shows that it is not just a matter of domestic gains and
foreign losses, but a policy that imposes substantial domestic costs as
well.

Consider two countries, Brazil and the United States, who produce sugar.
Each country has a domestic supply and demand for sugar, as [Table
20.1](#Table_34_01) details and [Figure 20.2](#CNX_Econ_C34_001)
illustrates. In Brazil, without trade, the equilibrium price of sugar is
12 cents per pound and the equilibrium output is 30 tons. When there is
no trade in the United States, the equilibrium price of sugar is 24
cents per pound and the equilibrium quantity is 80 tons. We label these
equilibrium points as point E in each part of the figure.

![](media/rId29.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.74in"}

Figure 20.2 The Sugar Trade between Brazil and the United States Before
trade, the equilibrium price of sugar in Brazil is 12 cents a pound and
it is 24 cents per pound in the United States. When trade is allowed,
businesses will buy cheap sugar in Brazil and sell it in the United
States. This will result in higher prices in Brazil and lower prices in
the United States. Ignoring transaction costs, prices should converge to
16 cents per pound, with Brazil exporting 15 tons of sugar and the
United States importing 15 tons of sugar. If trade is only partly open
between the countries, it will lead to an outcome between the free-trade
and no-trade possibilities.

Table 20.1 The Sugar Trade between Brazil and the United States

If international trade between Brazil and the United States now becomes
possible, profit-seeking firms will spot an opportunity: buy sugar
cheaply in Brazil, and sell it at a higher price in the United States.
As sugar is shipped from Brazil to the United States, the quantity of
sugar produced in Brazil will be greater than Brazilian consumption
(with the extra production exported), and the amount produced in the
United States will be less than the amount of U.S. consumption (with the
extra consumption imported). Exports to the United States will reduce
the sugar supply in Brazil, raising its price. Imports into the United
States will increase the sugar supply, lowering its price. When the
sugar price is the same in both countries, there is no incentive to
trade further. As [Figure 20.2](#CNX_Econ_C34_001) shows, the
equilibrium with trade occurs at a price of 16 cents per pound. At that
price, the sugar farmers of Brazil supply a quantity of 40 tons, while
the consumers of Brazil buy only 25 tons.

The extra 15 tons of sugar production, shown by the horizontal gap
between the demand curve and the supply curve in Brazil, is exported to
the United States. In the United States, at a price of 16 cents, the
farmers produce a quantity of 72 tons and consumers demand a quantity of
87 tons. The excess demand of 15 tons by American consumers, shown by
the horizontal gap between demand and domestic supply at the price of 16
cents, is supplied by imported sugar. Free trade typically results in
income distribution effects, but the key is to recognize the overall
gains from trade, as [Figure 20.3](#CNX_Econ_C34_003) shows. Building on
the concepts that we outlined in [Demand and
Supply](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-introduction-to-demand-and-supply)
and [Demand, Supply, and
Efficiency](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-5-demand-supply-and-efficiency)
in terms of consumer and producer surplus, [Figure
20.3](#CNX_Econ_C34_003) (a) shows that producers in Brazil gain by
selling more sugar at a higher price, while [Figure
20.3](#CNX_Econ_C34_003) (b) shows consumers in the United States
benefit from the lower price and greater availability of sugar.
Consumers in Brazil are worse off (compare their no-trade consumer
surplus with the free-trade consumer surplus) and U.S. producers of
sugar are worse off. There are gains from trade---an increase in social
surplus in each country. That is, both the United States and Brazil are
better off than they would be without trade. The following Clear It Up
feature explains how trade policy can influence low-income countries.

![](media/rId36.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.695in"}

Figure 20.3 Free Trade of Sugar Free trade results in gains from trade.
Total surplus increases in both countries, as the two blue-shaded areas
show. However, there are clear income distribution effects. Producers
gain in the exporting country, while consumers lose; and in the
importing country, consumers gain and producers lose.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/sugartrade) to read more
about the global sugar trade.

 

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### Why are there low-income countries? {#why-are-there-low-income-countries .Heading4Grey}

Why are the poor countries of the world poor? There are a number of
reasons, but one of them will surprise you: the trade policies of the
high-income countries. Following is a stark review of social priorities
which the international aid organization, Oxfam International has widely
publicized.

High-income countries of the world---primarily the United States,
countries of the European Union, and Japan---subsidize their domestic
farmers collectively by about \$200 billion per year. Why does this
matter?

It matters because the support of farmers in high-income countries is
devastating to the livelihoods of farmers in low-income countries. Even
when their climate and land are well-suited to products like cotton,
rice, sugar, or milk, farmers in low-income countries find it difficult
to compete. Farm subsidies in the high-income countries cause farmers in
those countries to increase the amount they produce. This increase in
supply drives down world prices of farm products below the costs of
production. As Michael Gerson of the *Washington Post* describes it:
"\[T\]he effects in the cotton-growing regions of West Africa are
dramatic . . . keep\[ing\] millions of Africans on the edge of
malnutrition. In some of the poorest countries on Earth, cotton farmers
are some of the poorest people, earning about a dollar a day. . . . Who
benefits from the current system of subsidies? About 20,000 American
cotton producers, with an average annual income of more than \$125,000."

As if subsidies were not enough, often, the high-income countries block
agricultural exports from low-income countries. In some cases, the
situation gets even worse when the governments of high-income countries,
having bought and paid for an excess supply of farm products, give away
those products in poor countries and drive local farmers out of business
altogether.

For example, shipments of excess milk from the European Union to Jamaica
have caused great hardship for Jamaican dairy farmers. Shipments of
excess rice from the United States to Haiti drove thousands of
low-income rice farmers in Haiti out of business. The opportunity costs
of protectionism are not paid just by domestic consumers, but also by
foreign producers---and for many agricultural products, those foreign
producers are the world's poor.

Now, let's look at what happens with protectionism. U.S. sugar farmers
are likely to argue that, if only they could be protected from sugar
imported from Brazil, the United States would have higher domestic sugar
production, more jobs in the sugar industry, and American sugar farmers
would receive a higher price. If the United States government sets a
high-enough tariff on imported sugar, or sets an import quota at zero,
the result will be that the quantity of sugar traded between countries
could be reduced to zero, and the prices in each country will return to
the levels before trade was allowed.

Blocking only some trade is also possible. Suppose that the United
States passed a sugar import quota of seven tons. The United States will
import no more than seven tons of sugar, which means that Brazil can
export no more than seven tons of sugar to the United States. As a
result, the price of sugar in the United States will be 20 cents, which
is the price where the quantity demanded is seven tons greater than the
domestic quantity supplied. Conversely, if Brazil can export only seven
tons of sugar, then the price of sugar in Brazil will be 14 cents per
pound, which is the price where the domestic quantity supplied in Brazil
is seven tons greater than domestic demand.

In general, when a country sets a low or medium tariff or import quota,
the equilibrium price and quantity will be somewhere between those that
prevail with no trade and those with completely free trade. The
following Work It Out explores the impact of these trade barriers.

### Work It Out {#work-it-out .Heading3Grey}

#### Effects of Trade Barriers {#effects-of-trade-barriers .Heading4Grey}

Let's look carefully at the effects of tariffs or quotas. If the U.S.
government imposes a tariff or quota sufficient to eliminate trade with
Brazil, two things occur: U.S. consumers pay a higher price and
therefore buy a smaller quantity of sugar. U.S. producers obtain a
higher price and they sell a larger quantity of sugar. We can measure
the effects of a tariff on producers and consumers in the United States
using two concepts that we developed in [Demand, Supply, and
Efficiency](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-5-demand-supply-and-efficiency):
consumer surplus and producer surplus.

![](media/rId49.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.41in"}

Figure 20.4 U.S. Sugar Supply and Demand When there is free trade, the
equilibrium is at point A. When there is no trade, the equilibrium is at
point E.

Step 1. Look at [Figure 20.4](#CNX_Econ_C34_002), which shows a
hypothetical version of the demand and supply of sugar in the United
States.

Step 2. Note that when there is free trade the sugar market is in
equilibrium at point A where Domestic Quantity Demanded (Qd) = Quantity
Supplied (Domestic Qs + Imports from Brazil) at a price of P~Trade~.

Step 3. Note, also, that imports are equal to the distance between
points C and A.

Step 4. Recall that consumer surplus is the value that consumers get
beyond what they paid for when they buy a product. Graphically, it is
the area under a demand curve but above the price. In this case, the
consumer surplus in the United States is the area of the triangle formed
by the points P~Trade~, A, and B.

Step 5. Recall, also, that producer surplus is another name for
profit---it is the income producers get above the cost of production,
which is shown by the supply curve here. In this case, the producer
surplus with trade is the area of the triangle formed by the points
P~trade~, C, and D.

Step 6. Suppose that the barriers to trade are imposed, imports are
excluded, and the price rises to P~NoTrade~. Look what happens to
producer surplus and consumer surplus. At the higher price, the domestic
quantity supplied increases from Qs to Q at point E. Because producers
are selling more quantity at a higher price, the producer surplus
increases to the area of the triangle P~NoTrade~, E, and D.

Step 7. Compare the areas of the two triangles and you will see the
increase in the producer surplus.

Step 8. Examine the consumer surplus. Consumers are now paying a higher
price to get a lower quantity (Q instead of Qd). Their consumer surplus
shrinks to the area of the triangle P~NoTrade~, E, and B.

Step 9. Determine the net effect. The producer surplus increases by the
area P~trade~, C, E, P~NoTrade~. The loss of consumer surplus, however,
is larger. It is the area P~trade~, A, E, P~NoTrade~. In other words,
consumers lose more than producers gain as a result of the trade
barriers and the United States has a lower social surplus.

### Who Benefits and Who Pays?

Using the demand and supply model, consider the impact of protectionism
on producers and consumers in each of the two countries. For protected
producers like U.S. sugar farmers, restricting imports is clearly
positive. Without a need to face imported products, these producers are
able to sell more, at a higher price. For consumers in the country with
the protected good, in this case U.S. sugar consumers, restricting
imports is clearly negative. They end up buying a lower quantity of the
good and paying a higher price for what they do buy, compared to the
equilibrium price and quantity with trade. The following Clear It Up
feature considers why a country might outsource jobs even for a domestic
product.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-1 .Heading3Grey}

#### Why are Life Savers, an American product, not made in America? {#why-are-life-savers-an-american-product-not-made-in-america .Heading4Grey}

In 1912, Clarence Crane invented Life Savers, the hard candy with the
hole in the middle, in Cleveland, Ohio. Starting in the late 1960s and
for 35 years afterward, a plant in Holland, Michigan produced 46 billion
Life Savers a year, in 200 million rolls. However, in 2002, the Kraft
Company announced that it would close the Michigan plant and move Life
Saver production across the border to Montreal, Canada.

One reason is that Canadian workers are paid slightly less, especially
in healthcare and insurance costs that are not linked to employment
there. Another main reason is that the United States government keeps
the sugar price high for the benefit of sugar farmers, with a
combination of a government price floor program and strict quotas on
imported sugar. In recent years, the price of U.S. sugar has been about
double the price of sugar produced by the rest of the world. Life Saver
production uses over 100 tons of sugar each day, because the candies are
95% sugar.

A number of other candy companies have also reduced U.S. production and
expanded foreign production. Sugar-using industries have eliminated over
100,000 jobs over the last 20 years, more than seven times the total
employment in sugar production. While the candy industry is especially
affected by the cost of sugar, the costs are spread more broadly. U.S.
consumers pay roughly \$1 billion per year in higher food prices because
of elevated sugar costs. Meanwhile, sugar producers in low-income
countries are driven out of business. Because of the sugar subsidies to
domestic producers and the quotas on imports, they cannot sell their
output profitably, or at all, in the United States market.

The fact that protectionism pushes up prices for consumers in the
country enacting such protectionism is not always acknowledged openly,
but it is not disputed. After all, if protectionism did not benefit
domestic producers, there would not be much point in enacting such
policies in the first place. Protectionism is simply a method of
requiring consumers to subsidize producers. The subsidy is indirect,
since consumers pay for it through higher prices, rather than a direct
government subsidy paid with money collected from taxpayers. However,
protectionism works like a subsidy, nonetheless. The American satirist
Ambrose Bierce defined "tariff" this way in his 1911 book, *The Devil's
Dictionary*: "Tariff, n. A scale of taxes on imports, designed to
protect the domestic producer against the greed of his consumer."

The effect of protectionism on producers and consumers in the foreign
country is complex. When a government uses an import quota to impose
partial protectionism, Brazilian sugar producers receive a lower price
for the sugar they sell in Brazil---but a higher price for the sugar
they are allowed to export to the United States. Notice that some of the
burden of protectionism, paid by domestic consumers, ends up in the
hands of foreign producers in this case. Brazilian sugar consumers seem
to benefit from U.S. protectionism, because it reduces the price of
sugar that they pay (compared to the free-trade situation). On the other
hand, at least some of these Brazilian sugar consumers also work as
sugar farmers, so protectionism reduces their incomes and jobs.
Moreover, if trade between the countries vanishes, Brazilian consumers
would miss out on better prices for imported goods---which do not appear
in our single-market example of sugar protectionism.

The effects of protectionism on foreign countries notwithstanding,
protectionism requires domestic consumers of a product (consumers may
include either households or other firms) to pay higher prices to
benefit domestic producers of that product. In addition, when a country
enacts protectionism, it loses the economic gains it would have been
able to achieve through a combination of comparative advantage,
specialized learning, and economies of scale, concepts that we discuss
in [International
Trade](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/19-introduction-to-international-trade).
