## 3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain demand, quantity demanded, and the law of demand
-   Explain supply, quantity supplied, and the law of supply
-   Identify a demand curve and a supply curve
-   Explain equilibrium, equilibrium price, and equilibrium quantity

First let's first focus on what economists mean by demand, what they
mean by supply, and then how demand and supply interact in a market.

### Demand for Goods and Services

Economists use the term demand to refer to the amount of some good or
service consumers are willing and able to purchase at each price. Demand
is fundamentally based on needs and wants---if you have no need or want
for something, you won\'t buy it. While a consumer may be able to
differentiate between a need and a want, from an economist's perspective
they are the same thing. Demand is also based on ability to pay. If you
cannot pay for it, you have no effective demand. By this definition, a
person who does not have a drivers license has no effective demand for a
car.

What a buyer pays for a unit of the specific good or service is called
price. The total number of units that consumers would purchase at that
price is called the quantity demanded. A rise in price of a good or
service almost always decreases the quantity demanded of that good or
service. Conversely, a fall in price will increase the quantity
demanded. When the price of a gallon of gasoline increases, for example,
people look for ways to reduce their consumption by combining several
errands, commuting by carpool or mass transit, or taking weekend or
vacation trips closer to home. Economists call this inverse relationship
between price and quantity demanded the law of demand. The law of demand
assumes that all other variables that affect demand (which we explain in
the next module) are held constant.

We can show an example from the market for gasoline in a table or a
graph. Economist call a table that shows the quantity demanded at each
price, such as [Table 3.1](#Table_03_01), a demand schedule. In this
case we measure price in dollars per gallon of gasoline. We measure the
quantity demanded in millions of gallons over some time period (for
example, per day or per year) and over some geographic area (like a
state or a country). A demand curve shows the relationship between price
and quantity demanded on a graph like [Figure 3.2](#CNX_Econ_C03_001),
with quantity on the horizontal axis and the price per gallon on the
vertical axis. (Note that this is an exception to the normal rule in
mathematics that the independent variable (x) goes on the horizontal
axis and the dependent variable (y) goes on the vertical axis. Economics
is not math.)

[Table 3.1](#Table_03_01) shows the demand schedule and the graph in
[Figure 3.2](#CNX_Econ_C03_001) shows the demand curve. These are two
ways to describe the same relationship between price and quantity
demanded.

Table 3.1 Price and Quantity Demanded of Gasoline

![](media/rId28.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.61in"}

Figure 3.2 A Demand Curve for Gasoline The demand schedule shows that as
price rises, quantity demanded decreases, and vice versa. We graph these
points, and the line connecting them is the demand curve (D). The
downward slope of the demand curve again illustrates the law of
demand---the inverse relationship between prices and quantity demanded.

Demand curves will appear somewhat different for each product. They may
appear relatively steep or flat, or they may be straight or curved.
Nearly all demand curves share the fundamental similarity that they
slope down from left to right. Demand curves embody the law of demand:
As the price increases, the quantity demanded decreases, and conversely,
as the price decreases, the quantity demanded increases.

Confused about these different types of demand? Read the next Clear It
Up feature.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### Is demand the same as quantity demanded? {#is-demand-the-same-as-quantity-demanded .Heading4Grey}

In economic terminology, demand is not the same as quantity demanded.
When economists talk about demand, they mean the relationship between a
range of prices and the quantities demanded at those prices, as
illustrated by a demand curve or a demand schedule. When economists talk
about quantity demanded, they mean only a certain point on the demand
curve, or one quantity on the demand schedule. In short, demand refers
to the curve and quantity demanded refers to a (specific) point on the
curve.

### Supply of Goods and Services

When economists talk about supply, they mean the amount of some good or
service a producer is willing to supply at each price. Price is what the
producer receives for selling one unit of a good or service. A rise in
price almost always leads to an increase in the quantity supplied of
that good or service, while a fall in price will decrease the quantity
supplied. When the price of gasoline rises, for example, it encourages
profit-seeking firms to take several actions: expand exploration for oil
reserves; drill for more oil; invest in more pipelines and oil tankers
to bring the oil to plants for refining into gasoline; build new oil
refineries; purchase additional pipelines and trucks to ship the
gasoline to gas stations; and open more gas stations or keep existing
gas stations open longer hours. Economists call this positive
relationship between price and quantity supplied---that a higher price
leads to a higher quantity supplied and a lower price leads to a lower
quantity supplied---the law of supply. The law of supply assumes that
all other variables that affect supply (to be explained in the next
module) are held constant.

Still unsure about the different types of supply? See the following
Clear It Up feature.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up-1 .Heading3Grey}

#### Is supply the same as quantity supplied? {#is-supply-the-same-as-quantity-supplied .Heading4Grey}

In economic terminology, supply is not the same as quantity supplied.
When economists refer to supply, they mean the relationship between a
range of prices and the quantities supplied at those prices, a
relationship that we can illustrate with a supply curve or a supply
schedule. When economists refer to quantity supplied, they mean only a
certain point on the supply curve, or one quantity on the supply
schedule. In short, supply refers to the curve and quantity supplied
refers to a (specific) point on the curve.

[Figure 3.3](#CNX_Econ_C03_002) illustrates the law of supply, again
using the market for gasoline as an example. Like demand, we can
illustrate supply using a table or a graph. A supply schedule is a
table, like [Table 3.2](#Table_03_02), that shows the quantity supplied
at a range of different prices. Again, we measure price in dollars per
gallon of gasoline and we measure quantity supplied in millions of
gallons. A supply curve is a graphic illustration of the relationship
between price, shown on the vertical axis, and quantity, shown on the
horizontal axis. The supply schedule and the supply curve are just two
different ways of showing the same information. Notice that the
horizontal and vertical axes on the graph for the supply curve are the
same as for the demand curve.

![](media/rId42.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.47in"}

Figure 3.3 A Supply Curve for Gasoline The supply schedule is the table
that shows quantity supplied of gasoline at each price. As price rises,
quantity supplied also increases, and vice versa. The supply curve (S)
is created by graphing the points from the supply schedule and then
connecting them. The upward slope of the supply curve illustrates the
law of supply---that a higher price leads to a higher quantity supplied,
and vice versa.

Table 3.2 Price and Supply of Gasoline

The shape of supply curves will vary somewhat according to the product:
steeper, flatter, straighter, or curved. Nearly all supply curves,
however, share a basic similarity: they slope up from left to right and
illustrate the law of supply: as the price rises, say, from \$1.00 per
gallon to \$2.20 per gallon, the quantity supplied increases from 500
gallons to 720 gallons. Conversely, as the price falls, the quantity
supplied decreases.

### Equilibrium---Where Demand and Supply Intersect

Because the graphs for demand and supply curves both have price on the
vertical axis and quantity on the horizontal axis, the demand curve and
supply curve for a particular good or service can appear on the same
graph. Together, demand and supply determine the price and the quantity
that will be bought and sold in a market.

[Figure 3.4](#CNX_Econ_C03_003) illustrates the interaction of demand
and supply in the market for gasoline. The demand curve (D) is identical
to [Figure 3.2](#CNX_Econ_C03_001). The supply curve (S) is identical to
[Figure 3.3](#CNX_Econ_C03_002). [Table 3.3](#Table_03_03) contains the
same information in tabular form.

![](media/rId47.jpeg){width="3.37in" height="2.37in"}

Figure 3.4 Demand and Supply for Gasoline The demand curve (D) and the
supply curve (S) intersect at the equilibrium point E, with a price of
\$1.40 and a quantity of 600. The equilibrium price is the only price
where quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied. At a price above
equilibrium like \$1.80, quantity supplied exceeds the quantity
demanded, so there is excess supply. At a price below equilibrium such
as \$1.20, quantity demanded exceeds quantity supplied, so there is
excess demand.

Table 3.3 Price, Quantity Demanded, and Quantity Supplied

Remember this: When two lines on a diagram cross, this intersection
usually means something. The point where the supply curve (S) and the
demand curve (D) cross, designated by point E in [Figure
3.4](#CNX_Econ_C03_003), is called the equilibrium. The equilibrium
price is the only price where the plans of consumers and the plans of
producers agree---that is, where the amount of the product consumers
want to buy (quantity demanded) is equal to the amount producers want to
sell (quantity supplied). Economists call this common quantity the
equilibrium quantity. At any other price, the quantity demanded does not
equal the quantity supplied, so the market is not in equilibrium at that
price.

In [Figure 3.4](#CNX_Econ_C03_003), the equilibrium price is \$1.40 per
gallon of gasoline and the equilibrium quantity is 600 million gallons.
If you had only the demand and supply schedules, and not the graph, you
could find the equilibrium by looking for the price level on the tables
where the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied are equal.

The word "equilibrium" means "balance." If a market is at its
equilibrium price and quantity, then it has no reason to move away from
that point. However, if a market is not at equilibrium, then economic
pressures arise to move the market toward the equilibrium price and the
equilibrium quantity.

Imagine, for example, that the price of a gallon of gasoline was above
the equilibrium price---that is, instead of \$1.40 per gallon, the price
is \$1.80 per gallon. The dashed horizontal line at the price of \$1.80
in [Figure 3.4](#CNX_Econ_C03_003) illustrates this above-equilibrium
price. At this higher price, the quantity demanded drops from 600 to
500. This decline in quantity reflects how consumers react to the higher
price by finding ways to use less gasoline.

Moreover, at this higher price of \$1.80, the quantity of gasoline
supplied rises from 600 to 680, as the higher price makes it more
profitable for gasoline producers to expand their output. Now, consider
how quantity demanded and quantity supplied are related at this
above-equilibrium price. Quantity demanded has fallen to 500 gallons,
while quantity supplied has risen to 680 gallons. In fact, at any
above-equilibrium price, the quantity supplied exceeds the quantity
demanded. We call this an excess supply or a surplus.

With a surplus, gasoline accumulates at gas stations, in tanker trucks,
in pipelines, and at oil refineries. This accumulation puts pressure on
gasoline sellers. If a surplus remains unsold, those firms involved in
making and selling gasoline are not receiving enough cash to pay their
workers and to cover their expenses. In this situation, some producers
and sellers will want to cut prices, because it is better to sell at a
lower price than not to sell at all. Once some sellers start cutting
prices, others will follow to avoid losing sales. These price reductions
in turn will stimulate a higher quantity demanded. Therefore, if the
price is above the equilibrium level, incentives built into the
structure of demand and supply will create pressures for the price to
fall toward the equilibrium.

Now suppose that the price is below its equilibrium level at \$1.20 per
gallon, as the dashed horizontal line at this price in [Figure
3.4](#CNX_Econ_C03_003) shows. At this lower price, the quantity
demanded increases from 600 to 700 as drivers take longer trips, spend
more minutes warming up the car in the driveway in wintertime, stop
sharing rides to work, and buy larger cars that get fewer miles to the
gallon. However, the below-equilibrium price reduces gasoline producers'
incentives to produce and sell gasoline, and the quantity supplied falls
from 600 to 550.

When the price is below equilibrium, there is excess demand, or a
shortage---that is, at the given price the quantity demanded, which has
been stimulated by the lower price, now exceeds the quantity supplied,
which has been depressed by the lower price. In this situation, eager
gasoline buyers mob the gas stations, only to find many stations running
short of fuel. Oil companies and gas stations recognize that they have
an opportunity to make higher profits by selling what gasoline they have
at a higher price. As a result, the price rises toward the equilibrium
level. Read [Demand, Supply, and
Efficiency](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-5-demand-supply-and-efficiency)
for more discussion on the importance of the demand and supply model.
