## 3.3 Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Identify equilibrium price and quantity through the four-step
    process
-   Graph equilibrium price and quantity
-   Contrast shifts of demand or supply and movements along a demand or
    supply curve
-   Graph demand and supply curves, including equilibrium price and
    quantity, based on real-world examples

Let's begin this discussion with a single economic event. It might be an
event that affects demand, like a change in income, population, tastes,
prices of substitutes or complements, or expectations about future
prices. It might be an event that affects supply, like a change in
natural conditions, input prices, or technology, or government policies
that affect production. How does this economic event affect equilibrium
price and quantity? We will analyze this question using a four-step
process.

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model before the economic change took
place. To establish the model requires four standard pieces of
information: The law of demand, which tells us the slope of the demand
curve is negative; the law of supply, which tells us that the slope of
the supply curve is positive; the shift variables for demand; and the
shift variables for supply. From this model, find the initial
equilibrium values for price and quantity.

Step 2. Decide whether the economic change you are analyzing affects
demand or supply. In other words, does the event refer to something in
the list of demand factors or supply factors?

Step 3. Decide whether the effect on demand or supply causes the curve
to shift to the right or to the left, and sketch the new demand or
supply curve on the diagram. In other words, does the event increase or
decrease the amount consumers want to buy or producers want to sell?

Step 4. Identify the new equilibrium and then compare the original
equilibrium price and quantity to the new equilibrium price and
quantity.

Let's consider one example that involves a shift in supply and one that
involves a shift in demand. Then we will consider an example where both
supply and demand shift.

### Good Weather for Salmon Fishing

Suppose that during the summer of 2015, weather conditions were
excellent for commercial salmon fishing off the California coast. Heavy
rains meant higher than normal levels of water in the rivers, which
helps the salmon to breed. Slightly cooler ocean temperatures stimulated
the growth of plankton, the microscopic organisms at the bottom of the
ocean food chain, providing everything in the ocean with a hearty food
supply. The ocean stayed calm during fishing season, so commercial
fishing operations did not lose many days to bad weather. How did these
climate conditions affect the quantity and price of salmon? [Figure
3.16](#CNX_Econ_C03_010) illustrates the four-step approach, which we
explain below, to work through this problem. [Table 3.6](#Table_03_07)
also provides the information to work the problem.

![](media/rId22.jpeg){width="3.395in" height="2.945in"}

Figure 3.16 Good Weather for Salmon Fishing: The Four-Step Process
Unusually good weather leads to changes in the price and quantity of
salmon.

Table 3.6 Salmon Fishing

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate the market for
salmon in the year before the good weather conditions began. The demand
curve D~0~ and the supply curve S~0~ show that the original equilibrium
price is \$3.25 per pound and the original equilibrium quantity is
250,000 fish. (This price per pound is what commercial buyers pay at the
fishing docks. What consumers pay at the grocery is higher.)

Step 2. Did the economic event affect supply or demand? Good weather is
an example of a natural condition that affects supply.

Step 3. Was the effect on supply an increase or a decrease? Good weather
is a change in natural conditions that increases the quantity supplied
at any given price. The supply curve shifts to the right, moving from
the original supply curve S~0~ to the new supply curve S~1~, which
[Figure 3.16](#CNX_Econ_C03_010) and [Table 3.6](#Table_03_07) show.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original
equilibrium. At the new equilibrium E~1~, the equilibrium price falls
from \$3.25 to \$2.50, but the equilibrium quantity increases from
250,000 to 550,000 salmon. Notice that the equilibrium quantity demanded
increased, even though the demand curve did not move.

In short, good weather conditions increased supply of the California
commercial salmon. The result was a higher equilibrium quantity of
salmon bought and sold in the market at a lower price.

### Newspapers and the Internet

According to the Pew Research Center for People and the Press,
increasingly more people, especially younger people, are obtaining their
news from online and digital sources. The majority of U.S. adults now
own smartphones or tablets, and most of those Americans say they use
them in part to access the news. From 2004 to 2012, the share of
Americans who reported obtaining their news from digital sources
increased from 24% to 39%. How has this affected consumption of print
news media, and radio and television news? [Figure
3.17](#CNX_Econ_C03_011) and the text below illustrates using the
four-step analysis to answer this question.

![](media/rId28.jpeg){width="3.255in" height="2.985in"}

Figure 3.17 The Print News Market: A Four-Step Analysis A change in
tastes from print news sources to digital sources results in a leftward
shift in demand for the former. The result is a decrease in both
equilibrium price and quantity.

Step 1. Develop a demand and supply model to think about what the market
looked like before the event. The demand curve D~0~ and the supply curve
S~0~ show the original relationships. In this case, we perform the
analysis without specific numbers on the price and quantity axis.

Step 2. Did the described change affect supply or demand? A change in
tastes, from traditional news sources (print, radio, and television) to
digital sources, caused a change in demand for the former.

Step 3. Was the effect on demand positive or negative? A shift to
digital news sources will tend to mean a lower quantity demanded of
traditional news sources at every given price, causing the demand curve
for print and other traditional news sources to shift to the left, from
D~0~ to D~1~.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original
equilibrium price. The new equilibrium (E~1~) occurs at a lower quantity
and a lower price than the original equilibrium (E~0~).

The decline in print news reading predates 2004. Print newspaper
circulation peaked in 1973 and has declined since then due to
competition from television and radio news. In 1991, 55% of Americans
indicated they received their news from print sources, while only 29%
did so in 2012. Radio news has followed a similar path in recent
decades, with the share of Americans obtaining their news from radio
declining from 54% in 1991 to 33% in 2012. Television news has held its
own in recent years, with a market share staying in the mid to upper
fifties. What does this suggest for the future, given that two-thirds of
Americans under 30 years old say they do not obtain their news from
television at all?

### The Interconnections and Speed of Adjustment in Real Markets

In the real world, many factors that affect demand and supply can change
all at once. For example, the demand for cars might increase because of
rising incomes and population, and it might decrease because of rising
gasoline prices (a complementary good). Likewise, the supply of cars
might increase because of innovative new technologies that reduce the
cost of car production, and it might decrease as a result of new
government regulations requiring the installation of costly
pollution-control technology.

Moreover, rising incomes and population or changes in gasoline prices
will affect many markets, not just cars. How can an economist sort out
all these interconnected events? The answer lies in the *ceteris
paribus* assumption. Look at how each economic event affects each
market, one event at a time, holding all else constant. Then combine the
analyses to see the net effect.

### A Combined Example

The U.S. Postal Service is facing difficult challenges. Compensation for
postal workers tends to increase most years due to cost-of-living
increases. At the same time, increasingly more people are using email,
text, and other digital message forms such as Facebook and Twitter to
communicate with friends and others. What does this suggest about the
continued viability of the Postal Service? [Figure
3.18](#CNX_Econ_C03_029) and the text below illustrate this using the
four-step analysis to answer this question.

![](media/rId36.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.315in"}

Figure 3.18 Higher Compensation for Postal Workers: A Four-Step Analysis
(a) Higher labor compensation causes a leftward shift in the supply
curve, a decrease in the equilibrium quantity, and an increase in the
equilibrium price. (b) A change in tastes away from Postal Services
causes a leftward shift in the demand curve, a decrease in the
equilibrium quantity, and a decrease in the equilibrium price.

Since this problem involves two disturbances, we need two four-step
analyses, the first to analyze the effects of higher compensation for
postal workers, the second to analyze the effects of many people
switching from "snail mail" to email and other digital messages.

[Figure 3.18](#CNX_Econ_C03_029) (a) shows the shift in supply discussed
in the following steps.

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate what the market for
the U.S. Postal Service looked like before this scenario starts. The
demand curve D~0~ and the supply curve S~0~ show the original
relationships.

Step 2. Did the described change affect supply or demand? Labor
compensation is a cost of production. A change in production costs
caused a change in supply for the Postal Service.

Step 3. Was the effect on supply positive or negative? Higher labor
compensation leads to a lower quantity supplied of postal services at
every given price, causing the supply curve for postal services to shift
to the left, from S~0~ to S~1~.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original
equilibrium price. The new equilibrium (E~1~) occurs at a lower quantity
and a higher price than the original equilibrium (E~0~).

[Figure 3.18](#CNX_Econ_C03_029) (b) shows the shift in demand in the
following steps.

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate what the market for
U.S. Postal Services looked like before this scenario starts. The demand
curve D~0~ and the supply curve S~0~ show the original relationships.
Note that this diagram is independent from the diagram in panel (a).

Step 2. Did the change described affect supply or demand? A change in
tastes away from snail mail toward digital messages will cause a change
in demand for the Postal Service.

Step 3. Was the effect on demand positive or negative? A change in
tastes away from snailmail toward digital messages causes lower quantity
demanded of postal services at every given price, causing the demand
curve for postal services to shift to the left, from D~0~ to D~1~.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original
equilibrium price. The new equilibrium (E~2~) occurs at a lower quantity
and a lower price than the original equilibrium (E~0~).

The final step in a scenario where both supply and demand shift is to
combine the two individual analyses to determine what happens to the
equilibrium quantity and price. Graphically, we superimpose the previous
two diagrams one on top of the other, as in [Figure
3.19](#CNX_Econ_C03_030).

![](media/rId39.jpeg){width="3.255in" height="3.07in"}

Figure 3.19 Combined Effect of Decreased Demand and Decreased Supply
Supply and demand shifts cause changes in equilibrium price and
quantity.

Following are the results:

Effect on Quantity: The effect of higher labor compensation on Postal
Services because it raises the cost of production is to decrease the
equilibrium quantity. The effect of a change in tastes away from snail
mail is to decrease the equilibrium quantity. Since both shifts are to
the left, the overall impact is a decrease in the equilibrium quantity
of Postal Services (Q~3~). This is easy to see graphically, since Q~3~
is to the left of Q~0~.

Effect on Price: The overall effect on price is more complicated. The
effect of higher labor compensation on Postal Services, because it
raises the cost of production, is to increase the equilibrium price. The
effect of a change in tastes away from snail mail is to decrease the
equilibrium price. Since the two effects are in opposite directions,
unless we know the magnitudes of the two effects, the overall effect is
unclear. This is not unusual. When both curves shift, typically we can
determine the overall effect on price or on quantity, but not on both.
In this case, we determined the overall effect on the equilibrium
quantity, but not on the equilibrium price. In other cases, it might be
the opposite.

The next Clear It Up feature focuses on the difference between shifts of
supply or demand and movements along a curve.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### What is the difference between shifts of demand or supply versus movements along a demand or supply curve? {#what-is-the-difference-between-shifts-of-demand-or-supply-versus-movements-along-a-demand-or-supply-curve .Heading4Grey}

One common mistake in applying the demand and supply framework is to
confuse the shift of a demand or a supply curve with movement along a
demand or supply curve. As an example, consider a problem that asks
whether a drought will increase or decrease the equilibrium quantity and
equilibrium price of wheat. Lee, a student in an introductory economics
class, might reason:

"Well, it is clear that a drought reduces supply, so I will shift back
the supply curve, as in the shift from the original supply curve S~0~ to
S~1~ on the diagram (Shift 1). The equilibrium moves from E~0~ to E~1~,
the equilibrium quantity is lower and the equilibrium price is higher.
Then, a higher price makes farmers more likely to supply the good, so
the supply curve shifts right, as shows the shift from S~1~ to S~2~,
shows on the diagram (Shift 2), so that the equilibrium now moves from
E~1~ to E~2~. The higher price, however, also reduces demand and so
causes demand to shift back, like the shift from the original demand
curve, D~0~ to D~1~ on the diagram (labeled Shift 3), and the
equilibrium moves from E~2~ to E~3~."

![](media/rId43.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.53in"}

Figure 3.20 Shifts of Demand or Supply versus Movements along a Demand
or Supply Curve A shift in one curve never causes a shift in the other
curve. Rather, a shift in one curve causes a movement along the second
curve.

At about this point, Lee suspects that this answer is headed down the
wrong path. Think about what might be wrong with Lee's logic, and then
read the answer that follows.

*Answer:* Lee's first step is correct: that is, a drought shifts back
the supply curve of wheat and leads to a prediction of a lower
equilibrium quantity and a higher equilibrium price. This corresponds to
a movement along the original demand curve (D~0~), from E~0~ to E~1~.
The rest of Lee's argument is wrong, because it mixes up shifts in
supply with quantity supplied, and shifts in demand with quantity
demanded. A higher or lower price never shifts the supply curve, as
suggested by the shift in supply from S~1~ to S~2~. Instead, a price
change leads to a movement along a given supply curve. Similarly, a
higher or lower price never shifts a demand curve, as suggested in the
shift from D~0~ to D~1~. Instead, a price change leads to a movement
along a given demand curve. Remember, a change in the price of a good
never causes the demand or supply curve for that good to shift.

Think carefully about the timeline of events: What happens first, what
happens next? What is cause, what is effect? If you keep the order
right, you are more likely to get the analysis correct.

In the four-step analysis of how economic events affect equilibrium
price and quantity, the movement from the old to the new equilibrium
seems immediate. As a practical matter, however, prices and quantities
often do not zoom straight to equilibrium. More realistically, when an
economic event causes demand or supply to shift, prices and quantities
set off in the general direction of equilibrium. Even as they are moving
toward one new equilibrium, a subsequent change in demand or supply
often pushes prices toward another equilibrium.
