## 3.5 Demand, Supply, and Efficiency

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Contrast consumer surplus, producer surplus, and social surplus
-   Explain why price floors and price ceilings can be inefficient
-   Analyze demand and supply as a social adjustment mechanism

The familiar demand and supply diagram holds within it the concept of
economic efficiency. One typical way that economists define efficiency
is when it is impossible to improve the situation of one party without
imposing a cost on another. Conversely, if a situation is inefficient,
it becomes possible to benefit at least one party without imposing costs
on others.

Efficiency in the demand and supply model has the same basic meaning:
The economy is getting as much benefit as possible from its scarce
resources and all the possible gains from trade have been achieved. In
other words, the optimal amount of each good and service is produced and
consumed.

### Consumer Surplus, Producer Surplus, Social Surplus

Consider a market for tablet computers, as [Figure
3.23](#CNX_Econ_C03_015) shows. The equilibrium price is \$80 and the
equilibrium quantity is 28 million. To see the benefits to consumers,
look at the segment of the demand curve above the equilibrium point and
to the left. This portion of the demand curve shows that at least some
demanders would have been willing to pay more than \$80 for a tablet.

For example, point J shows that if the price were \$90, 20 million
tablets would be sold. Those consumers who would have been willing to
pay \$90 for a tablet based on the utility they expect to receive from
it, but who were able to pay the equilibrium price of \$80, clearly
received a benefit beyond what they had to pay. Remember, the demand
curve traces consumers' willingness to pay for different quantities. The
amount that individuals would have been willing to pay, minus the amount
that they actually paid, is called consumer surplus. Consumer surplus is
the area labeled F---that is, the area above the market price and below
the demand curve.

![](media/rId26.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.995in"}

Figure 3.23 Consumer and Producer Surplus The somewhat triangular area
labeled by F shows the area of consumer surplus, which shows that the
equilibrium price in the market was less than what many of the consumers
were willing to pay. Point J on the demand curve shows that, even at the
price of \$90, consumers would have been willing to purchase a quantity
of 20 million. The somewhat triangular area labeled by G shows the area
of producer surplus, which shows that the equilibrium price received in
the market was more than what many of the producers were willing to
accept for their products. For example, point K on the supply curve
shows that at a price of \$45, firms would have been willing to supply a
quantity of 14 million.

The supply curve shows the quantity that firms are willing to supply at
each price. For example, point K in [Figure 3.23](#CNX_Econ_C03_015)
illustrates that, at \$45, firms would still have been willing to supply
a quantity of 14 million. Those producers who would have been willing to
supply the tablets at \$45, but who were instead able to charge the
equilibrium price of \$80, clearly received an extra benefit beyond what
they required to supply the product. The extra benefit producers receive
from selling a good or service, measured by the price the producer
actually received minus the price the producer would have been willing
to accept is called producer surplus. In [Figure
3.23](#CNX_Econ_C03_015), producer surplus is the area labeled G---that
is, the area between the market price and the segment of the supply
curve below the equilibrium.

The sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus is social surplus, also
referred to as economic surplus or total surplus. In [Figure
3.23](#CNX_Econ_C03_015) we show social surplus as the area F + G.
Social surplus is larger at equilibrium quantity and price than it would
be at any other quantity. This demonstrates the economic efficiency of
the market equilibrium. In addition, at the efficient level of output,
it is impossible to produce greater consumer surplus without reducing
producer surplus, and it is impossible to produce greater producer
surplus without reducing consumer surplus.

### Inefficiency of Price Floors and Price Ceilings

The imposition of a price floor or a price ceiling will prevent a market
from adjusting to its equilibrium price and quantity, and thus will
create an inefficient outcome. However, there is an additional twist
here. Along with creating inefficiency, price floors and ceilings will
also transfer some consumer surplus to producers, or some producer
surplus to consumers.

Imagine that several firms develop a promising but expensive new drug
for treating back pain. If this therapy is left to the market, the
equilibrium price will be \$600 per month and 20,000 people will use the
drug, as shown in [Figure 3.24](#CNX_Econ_C03_028) (a). The original
level of consumer surplus is T + U and producer surplus is V + W + X.
However, the government decides to impose a price ceiling of \$400 to
make the drug more affordable. At this price ceiling, firms in the
market now produce only 15,000.

As a result, two changes occur. First, an inefficient outcome occurs and
the total surplus of society is reduced. The loss in social surplus that
occurs when the economy produces at an inefficient quantity is called
deadweight loss. In a very real sense, it is like money thrown away that
benefits no one. In [Figure 3.24](#CNX_Econ_C03_028) (a), the deadweight
loss is the area U + W. When deadweight loss exists, it is possible for
both consumer and producer surplus to be higher, in this case because
the price control is blocking some suppliers and demanders from
transactions they would both be willing to make.

A second change from the price ceiling is that some of the producer
surplus is transferred to consumers. After the price ceiling is imposed,
the new consumer surplus is T + V, while the new producer surplus is X.
In other words, the price ceiling transfers the area of surplus (V) from
producers to consumers. Note that the gain to consumers is less than the
loss to producers, which is just another way of seeing the deadweight
loss.

![](media/rId38.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.82in"}

Figure 3.24 Efficiency and Price Floors and Ceilings (a) The original
equilibrium price is \$600 with a quantity of 20,000. Consumer surplus
is T + U, and producer surplus is V + W + X. A price ceiling is imposed
at \$400, so firms in the market now produce only a quantity of 15,000.
As a result, the new consumer surplus is T + V, while the new producer
surplus is X. (b) The original equilibrium is \$8 at a quantity of
1,800. Consumer surplus is G + H + J, and producer surplus is I + K. A
price floor is imposed at \$12, which means that quantity demanded falls
to 1,400. As a result, the new consumer surplus is G, and the new
producer surplus is H + I.

[Figure 3.24](#CNX_Econ_C03_028) (b) shows a price floor example using a
string of struggling movie theaters, all in the same city. The current
equilibrium is \$8 per movie ticket, with 1,800 people attending movies.
The original consumer surplus is G + H + J, and producer surplus is I +
K. The city government is worried that movie theaters will go out of
business, reducing the entertainment options available to citizens, so
it decides to impose a price floor of \$12 per ticket. As a result, the
quantity demanded of movie tickets falls to 1,400. The new consumer
surplus is G, and the new producer surplus is H + I. In effect, the
price floor causes the area H to be transferred from consumer to
producer surplus, but also causes a deadweight loss of J + K.

This analysis shows that a price ceiling, like a law establishing rent
controls, will transfer some producer surplus to consumers---which helps
to explain why consumers often favor them. Conversely, a price floor
like a guarantee that farmers will receive a certain price for their
crops will transfer some consumer surplus to producers, which explains
why producers often favor them. However, both price floors and price
ceilings block some transactions that buyers and sellers would have been
willing to make, and creates deadweight loss. Removing such barriers, so
that prices and quantities can adjust to their equilibrium level, will
increase the economy's social surplus.

### Demand and Supply as a Social Adjustment Mechanism

The demand and supply model emphasizes that prices are not set only by
demand or only by supply, but by the interaction between the two. In
1890, the famous economist Alfred Marshall wrote that asking whether
supply or demand determined a price was like arguing "whether it is the
upper or the under blade of a pair of scissors that cuts a piece of
paper." The answer is that both blades of the demand and supply scissors
are always involved.

The adjustments of equilibrium price and quantity in a market-oriented
economy often occur without much government direction or oversight. If
the coffee crop in Brazil suffers a terrible frost, then the supply
curve of coffee shifts to the left and the price of coffee rises. Some
people continue to drink coffee and pay the higher price. Others switch
to tea or soft drinks. No government commission is needed to figure out
how to adjust coffee prices, which companies will be allowed to process
the remaining supply, which supermarkets in which cities will get how
much coffee to sell, or which consumers will ultimately be allowed to
drink the brew. Such adjustments in response to price changes happen all
the time in a market economy, often so smoothly and rapidly that we
barely notice them.

Think for a moment of all the seasonal foods that are available and
inexpensive at certain times of the year, like fresh corn in midsummer,
but more expensive at other times of the year. People alter their diets
and restaurants alter their menus in response to these fluctuations in
prices without fuss or fanfare. For both the U.S. economy and the world
economy as a whole, markets---that is, demand and supply---are the
primary social mechanism for answering the basic questions about what is
produced, how it is produced, and for whom it is produced.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Why Can We Not Get Enough of Organic Food? {#why-can-we-not-get-enough-of-organic-food .Heading4Grey}

Organic food is grown without synthetic pesticides, chemical fertilizers
or genetically modified seeds. In recent decades, the demand for organic
products has increased dramatically. The Organic Trade Association
reported sales increased from \$1 billion in 1990 to nearly \$62 billion
in 2020, more than 90% of which were sales of food products.

Why, then, are organic foods more expensive than their conventional
counterparts? The answer is a clear application of the theories of
supply and demand. As people have learned more about the harmful effects
of chemical fertilizers, growth hormones, pesticides and the like from
large-scale factory farming, our tastes and preferences for safer,
organic foods have increased. This change in tastes has been reinforced
by increases in income, which allow people to purchase pricier products,
and has made organic foods more mainstream. This shift, in addition to
population growth, has led to an increased demand for organic foods.
Graphically, the demand curve has shifted right, and we have moved up
the supply curve as producers have responded to the higher prices by
supplying a greater quantity.

In addition to the movement along the supply curve, we have also had an
increase in the number of farmers converting to organic farming over
time. This is represented by a shift to the right of the supply curve.
Since both demand and supply have shifted to the right, the resulting
equilibrium quantity of organic foods is definitely higher, but the
price will only fall when the increase in supply is larger than the
increase in demand. We may need more time before we see lower prices in
organic foods. Since the production costs of these foods may remain
higher than conventional farming, because organic fertilizers and pest
management techniques are more expensive, they may never fully catch up
with the lower prices of non-organic foods.

As a final, specific example: The Environmental Working Group's "Dirty
Dozen" list of fruits and vegetables, which test high for pesticide
residue even after washing, was released in April 2013. The inclusion of
strawberries on the list led to an increase in demand for organic
strawberries, resulting in both a higher equilibrium price and quantity
of sales.
