## Key Concepts and Summary

### 3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services

A demand schedule is a table that shows the quantity demanded at
different prices in the market. A demand curve shows the relationship
between quantity demanded and price in a given market on a graph. The
law of demand states that a higher price typically leads to a lower
quantity demanded.

A supply schedule is a table that shows the quantity supplied at
different prices in the market. A supply curve shows the relationship
between quantity supplied and price on a graph. The law of supply says
that a higher price typically leads to a higher quantity supplied.

The equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity occur where the supply
and demand curves cross. The equilibrium occurs where the quantity
demanded is equal to the quantity supplied. If the price is below the
equilibrium level, then the quantity demanded will exceed the quantity
supplied. Excess demand or a shortage will exist. If the price is above
the equilibrium level, then the quantity supplied will exceed the
quantity demanded. Excess supply or a surplus will exist. In either
case, economic pressures will push the price toward the equilibrium
level.

### 3.2 Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services

Economists often use the *ceteris paribus* or "other things being equal"
assumption: while examining the economic impact of one event, all other
factors remain unchanged for analysis purposes. Factors that can shift
the demand curve for goods and services, causing a different quantity to
be demanded at any given price, include changes in tastes, population,
income, prices of substitute or complement goods, and expectations about
future conditions and prices. Factors that can shift the supply curve
for goods and services, causing a different quantity to be supplied at
any given price, include input prices, natural conditions, changes in
technology, and government taxes, regulations, or subsidies.

### 3.3 Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process

When using the supply and demand framework to think about how an event
will affect the equilibrium price and quantity, proceed through four
steps: (1) sketch a supply and demand diagram to think about what the
market looked like before the event; (2) decide whether the event will
affect supply or demand; (3) decide whether the effect on supply or
demand is negative or positive, and draw the appropriate shifted supply
or demand curve; (4) compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to
the original ones.

### 3.4 Price Ceilings and Price Floors

Price ceilings prevent a price from rising above a certain level. When a
price ceiling is set below the equilibrium price, quantity demanded will
exceed quantity supplied, and excess demand or shortages will result.
Price floors prevent a price from falling below a certain level. When a
price floor is set above the equilibrium price, quantity supplied will
exceed quantity demanded, and excess supply or surpluses will result.
Price floors and price ceilings often lead to unintended consequences.

### 3.5 Demand, Supply, and Efficiency

Consumer surplus is the gap between the price that consumers are willing
to pay, based on their preferences, and the market equilibrium price.
Producer surplus is the gap between the price for which producers are
willing to sell a product, based on their costs, and the market
equilibrium price. Social surplus is the sum of consumer surplus and
producer surplus. Total surplus is larger at the equilibrium quantity
and price than it will be at any other quantity and price. Deadweight
loss is loss in total surplus that occurs when the economy produces at
an inefficient quantity.
