![](media/rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.933333333333333in"}

Figure 4.1 People often think of demand and supply in relation to goods,
but labor markets, such as the nursing profession, can also apply to
this analysis. (Credit: modification of \"Hospital do Sub√∫rbio\" by
Jaques Wagner Governador/Flickr Creative Commons, CC BY 2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   Demand and Supply at Work in Labor Markets
-   Demand and Supply in Financial Markets
-   The Market System as an Efficient Mechanism for Information

## Introduction to Labor and Financial Markets

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Baby Boomers Come of Age {#baby-boomers-come-of-age .Heading4Grey}

According to the 2020 Census, 22% of the U.S. population was 60 years
old or older, which means that more than 74 million people have reached
an age when they will need increased medical care.

The baby boomer population, the group born between 1946 and 1964, is
comprised of more than 71 million people who have already reached
retirement age or will soon reach retirement. As this population grows
older, they will be faced with common healthcare issues such as heart
conditions, arthritis, and Alzheimer's that may require hospitalization,
long-term, or at-home nursing care. Aging baby boomers and advances in
life-saving and life-extending technologies will increase the demand for
healthcare and nursing. Additionally, the Affordable Care Act, which
expands access to healthcare for millions of Americans, has further
increased the demand.

These data tell us, as economists, that the market for healthcare
professionals, and nurses in particular, will face several challenges.
Our study of supply and demand will help us to analyze what might happen
in the labor market for nursing and other healthcare professionals, as
we will discuss in the second half of this case at the end of the
chapter.

The theories of supply and demand do not apply just to markets for
goods. They apply to any market, even markets for things we may not
think of as goods and services like labor and financial services. Labor
markets are markets for employees or jobs. Financial services markets
are markets for saving or borrowing.

When we think about demand and supply curves in goods and services
markets, it is easy to picture the demanders and suppliers: businesses
produce the products and households buy them. Who are the demanders and
suppliers in labor and financial service markets? In labor markets job
seekers (individuals) are the suppliers of labor, while firms and other
employers who hire labor are the demanders for labor. In financial
markets, any individual or firm who saves contributes to the supply of
money, and any entity that borrows (person, firm, or government)
contributes to the demand for money.

As a college student, you most likely participate in both labor and
financial markets. Employment is a fact of life for most college
students: According to the National Center for Educational Statistics,
in 2018 43% of full-time college students and 81% of part-time college
students were employed. Most college students are also heavily involved
in financial markets, primarily as borrowers. As of the 2018--19 school
year, 43% of full-time undergraduate students were receiving loan aid to
help finance their education, and those loans averaged \$7,300 per year.
Many students also borrow for other expenses, like purchasing a car. As
this chapter will illustrate, we can analyze labor markets and financial
markets with the same tools we use to analyze demand and supply in the
goods markets.
