## Key Concepts and Summary

### 4.1 Demand and Supply at Work in Labor Markets

In the labor market, households are on the supply side of the market and
firms are on the demand side. In the market for financial capital,
households and firms can be on either side of the market: they are
suppliers of financial capital when they save or make financial
investments, and demanders of financial capital when they borrow or
receive financial investments.

In the demand and supply analysis of labor markets, we can measure the
price by the annual salary or hourly wage received. We can measure the
quantity of labor various ways, like number of workers or the number of
hours worked.

Factors that can shift the demand curve for labor include: a change in
the quantity demanded of the product that the labor produces; a change
in the production process that uses more or less labor; and a change in
government policy that affects the quantity of labor that firms wish to
hire at a given wage. Demand can also increase or decrease (shift) in
response to: workers' level of education and training, technology, the
number of companies, and availability and price of other inputs.

The main factors that can shift the supply curve for labor are: how
desirable a job appears to workers relative to the alternatives,
government policy that either restricts or encourages the quantity of
workers trained for the job, the number of workers in the economy, and
required education.

### 4.2 Demand and Supply in Financial Markets

In the demand and supply analysis of financial markets, the "price" is
the rate of return or the interest rate received. We measure the
quantity by the money that flows from those who supply financial capital
to those who demand it.

Two factors can shift the supply of financial capital to a certain
investment: if people want to alter their existing levels of
consumption, and if the riskiness or return on one investment changes
relative to other investments. Factors that can shift demand for capital
include business confidence and consumer confidence in the
future---since financial investments received in the present are
typically repaid in the future.

### 4.3 The Market System as an Efficient Mechanism for Information

The market price system provides a highly efficient mechanism for
disseminating information about relative scarcities of goods, services,
labor, and financial capital. Market participants do not need to know
why prices have changed, only that the changes require them to revisit
previous decisions they made about supply and demand. Price controls
hide information about the true scarcity of products and thereby cause
misallocation of resources.
