## 5.2 Polar Cases of Elasticity and Constant Elasticity

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Differentiate between infinite and zero elasticity
-   Analyze graphs in order to classify elasticity as constant unitary,
    infinite, or zero

There are two extreme cases of elasticity: when elasticity equals zero
and when it is infinite. A third case of interest is that of constant
unitary elasticity. We will describe each case. Infinite elasticity or
perfect elasticity refers to the extreme case where either the quantity
demanded (Qd) or supplied (Qs) changes by an infinite amount in response
to any change in price at all. In both cases, the supply and the demand
curve are horizontal as [Figure 5.4](#CNX_Econ_C05_006) shows. While
perfectly elastic supply curves are for the most part unrealistic, goods
with readily available inputs and whose production can easily expand
will feature highly elastic supply curves. Examples include pizza,
bread, books, and pencils. Similarly, perfectly elastic demand is an
extreme example. However, luxury goods, items that take a large share of
individuals' income, and goods with many substitutes are likely to have
highly elastic demand curves. Examples of such goods are Caribbean
cruises and sports vehicles.

![](media/rId25.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.115in"}

Figure 5.4 Infinite Elasticity The horizontal lines show that an
infinite quantity will be demanded or supplied at a specific price. This
illustrates the cases of a perfectly (or infinitely) elastic demand
curve and supply curve. The quantity supplied or demanded is extremely
responsive to price changes, moving from zero for prices close to P to
infinite when prices reach P.

Zero elasticity or perfect inelasticity, as [Figure
5.5](#CNX_Econ_C05_008) depicts, refers to the extreme case in which a
percentage change in price, no matter how large, results in zero change
in quantity. While a perfectly inelastic supply is an extreme example,
goods with limited supply of inputs are likely to feature highly
inelastic supply curves. Examples include diamond rings or housing in
prime locations such as apartments facing Central Park in New York City.
Similarly, while perfectly inelastic demand is an extreme case,
necessities with no close substitutes are likely to have highly
inelastic demand curves. This is the case of life-saving drugs and
gasoline.

![](media/rId30.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.0999989063867015in"}

Figure 5.5 Zero Elasticity The vertical supply curve and vertical demand
curve show that there will be zero percentage change in quantity (a)
demanded or (b) supplied, regardless of the price.

Constant unitary elasticity, in either a supply or demand curve, occurs
when a price change of one percent results in a quantity change of one
percent. [Figure 5.6](#CNX_Econ_C05_016) shows a demand curve with
constant unit elasticity. Using the midpoint method, you can calculate
that between points A and B on the demand curve, the price changes by
66.7% and quantity demanded also changes by 66.7%. Hence, the elasticity
equals 1. Between points B and C, price again changes by 66.7% as does
quantity, while between points C and D the corresponding percentage
changes are again 66.7% for both price and quantity. In each case, then,
the percentage change in price equals the percentage change in quantity,
and consequently elasticity equals 1. Notice that in absolute value, the
declines in price, as you step down the demand curve, are not identical.
Instead, the price falls by \$8.00 from A to B, by a smaller amount of
\$4.00 from B to C, and by a still smaller amount of \$2.00 from C to D.
As a result, a demand curve with constant unitary elasticity moves from
a steeper slope on the left and a flatter slope on the right---and a
curved shape overall.

![](media/rId34.jpeg){width="4.875in" height="4.008333333333334in"}

Figure 5.6 A Constant Unitary Elasticity Demand Curve A demand curve
with constant unitary elasticity will be a curved line. Notice how price
and quantity demanded change by an identical percentage amount between
each pair of points on the demand curve.

Unlike the demand curve with unitary elasticity, the supply curve with
unitary elasticity is represented by a straight line, and that line goes
through the origin. In each pair of points on the supply curve there is
an equal difference in quantity of 30. However, in percentage value,
using the midpoint method, the steps are decreasing as one moves from
left to right, from 28.6% to 22.2% to 18.2%, because the quantity points
in each percentage calculation are getting increasingly larger, which
expands the denominator in the elasticity calculation of the percentage
change in quantity.

Consider the price changes moving up the supply curve in [Figure
5.7](#CNX_Econ_C05_017). From points D to E to F and to G on the supply
curve, each step of \$1.50 is the same in absolute value. However, if we
measure the price changes in percentage change terms, using the midpoint
method, they are also decreasing, from 28.6% to 22.2% to 18.2%, because
the original price points in each percentage calculation are getting
increasingly larger in value, increasing the denominator in the
calculation of the percentage change in price. Along the constant
unitary elasticity supply curve, the percentage quantity increases on
the horizontal axis exactly match the percentage price increases on the
vertical axis---so this supply curve has a constant unitary elasticity
at all points.

![](media/rId37.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.685in"}

Figure 5.7 A Constant Unitary Elasticity Supply Curve A constant unitary
elasticity supply curve is a straight line reaching up from the origin.
Between each pair of points, the percentage increase in quantity
supplied is the same as the percentage increase in price.
