## 5.3 Elasticity and Pricing

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Analyze how price elasticities impact revenue
-   Evaluate how elasticity can cause shifts in demand and supply
-   Predict how the long-run and short-run impacts of elasticity affect
    equilibrium
-   Explain how the elasticity of demand and supply determine the
    incidence of a tax on buyers and sellers

Studying elasticities is useful for a number of reasons, pricing being
most important. Let's explore how elasticity relates to revenue and
pricing, both in the long and short run. First, let's look at the
elasticities of some common goods and services.

[Table 5.2](#Table_05_04) shows a selection of demand elasticities for
different goods and services drawn from a variety of different studies
by economists, listed in order of increasing elasticity.

Table 5.2 Some Selected Elasticities of Demand

Note that demand for necessities such as housing and electricity is
inelastic, while items that are not necessities such as restaurant meals
are more price-sensitive. If the price of a restaurant meal increases by
10%, the quantity demanded will decrease by 22.7%. A 10% increase in the
price of housing will cause only a slight decrease of 1.2% in the
quantity of housing demanded.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Read this [article](http://openstax.org/l/Movietickets) for an example
of price elasticity that may have affected you.

### Does Raising Price Bring in More Revenue?

Imagine that a band on tour is playing in an indoor arena with 15,000
seats. To keep this example simple, assume that the band keeps all the
money from ticket sales. Assume further that the band pays the costs for
its appearance, but that these costs, like travel, and setting up the
stage, are the same regardless of how many people are in the audience.
Finally, assume that all the tickets have the same price. (The same
insights apply if ticket prices are more expensive for some seats than
for others, but the calculations become more complicated.) The band
knows that it faces a downward-sloping demand curve; that is, if the
band raises the ticket price, it will sell fewer seats. How should the
band set the ticket price to generate the most total revenue, which in
this example, because costs are fixed, will also mean the highest
profits for the band? Should the band sell more tickets at a lower price
or fewer tickets at a higher price?

The key concept in thinking about collecting the most revenue is the
price elasticity of demand. Total revenue is price times the quantity of
tickets sold. Imagine that the band starts off thinking about a certain
price, which will result in the sale of a certain quantity of tickets.
The three possibilities are in [Table 5.3](#Table_05_05). If demand is
elastic at that price level, then the band should cut the price, because
the percentage drop in price will result in an even larger percentage
increase in the quantity sold---thus raising total revenue. However, if
demand is inelastic at that original quantity level, then the band
should raise the ticket price, because a certain percentage increase in
price will result in a smaller percentage decrease in the quantity
sold---and total revenue will rise. If demand has a unitary elasticity
at that quantity, then an equal percentage change in quantity will
offset a moderate percentage change in the price---so the band will earn
the same revenue whether it (moderately) increases or decreases the
ticket price.

Table 5.3 Will the Band Earn More Revenue by Changing Ticket Prices?

What if the band keeps cutting price, because demand is elastic, until
it reaches a level where it sells all 15,000 seats in the available
arena? If demand remains elastic at that quantity, the band might try to
move to a bigger arena, so that it could slash ticket prices further and
see a larger percentage increase in the quantity of tickets sold.
However, if the 15,000-seat arena is all that is available or if a
larger arena would add substantially to costs, then this option may not
work.

Conversely, a few bands are so famous, or have such fanatical
followings, that demand for tickets may be inelastic right up to the
point where the arena is full. These bands can, if they wish, keep
raising the ticket price. Ironically, some of the most popular bands
could make more revenue by setting prices so high that the arena is not
full---but those who buy the tickets would have to pay very high prices.
However, bands sometimes choose to sell tickets for less than the
absolute maximum they might be able to charge, often in the hope that
fans will feel happier and spend more on recordings, T-shirts, and other
paraphernalia.

### Can Businesses Pass Costs on to Consumers?

Most businesses face a day-to-day struggle to figure out ways to produce
at a lower cost, as one pathway to their goal of earning higher profits.
However, in some cases, the price of a key input over which the firm has
no control may rise. For example, many chemical companies use petroleum
as a key input, but they have no control over the world market price for
crude oil. Coffee shops use coffee as a key input, but they have no
control over the world market price of coffee. If the cost of a key
input rises, can the firm pass those higher costs along to consumers in
the form of higher prices? Conversely, if new and less expensive ways of
producing are invented, can the firm keep the benefits in the form of
higher profits, or will the market pressure them to pass the gains along
to consumers in the form of lower prices? The price elasticity of demand
plays a key role in answering these questions.

Imagine that as a consumer of legal pharmaceutical products, you read a
newspaper story that a technological breakthrough in the production of
aspirin has occurred, so that every aspirin factory can now produce
aspirin more cheaply. What does this discovery mean to you? [Figure
5.8](#CNX_Econ_C05_019) illustrates two possibilities. In [Figure
5.8](#CNX_Econ_C05_019) (a), the demand curve is highly inelastic. In
this case, a technological breakthrough that shifts supply to the right,
from S~0~ to S~1~, so that the equilibrium shifts from E~0~ to E~1~,
creates a substantially lower price for the product with relatively
little impact on the quantity sold. In [Figure 5.8](#CNX_Econ_C05_019)
(b), the demand curve is highly elastic. In this case, the technological
breakthrough leads to a much greater quantity sold in the market at very
close to the original price. Consumers benefit more, in general, when
the demand curve is more inelastic because the shift in the supply
results in a much lower price for consumers.

![](media/rId27.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.935in"}

Figure 5.8 Passing along Cost Savings to Consumers Cost-saving gains
cause supply to shift out to the right from S~0~ to S~1~; that is, at
any given price, firms will be willing to supply a greater quantity. If
demand is inelastic, as in (a), the result of this cost-saving
technological improvement will be substantially lower prices. If demand
is elastic, as in (b), the result will be only slightly lower prices.
Consumers benefit in either case, from a greater quantity at a lower
price, but the benefit is greater when demand is inelastic, as in (a).

Aspirin producers may find themselves in a nasty bind here. The
situation in [Figure 5.8](#CNX_Econ_C05_019), with extremely inelastic
demand, means that a new invention may cause the price to drop
dramatically while quantity changes little. As a result, the new
production technology can lead to a drop in the revenue that firms earn
from aspirin sales. However, if strong competition exists between
aspirin producers, each producer may have little choice but to search
for and implement any breakthrough that allows it to reduce production
costs. After all, if one firm decides not to implement such a
cost-saving technology, other firms that do can drive them out of
business.

Since demand for food is generally inelastic, farmers may often face the
situation in [Figure 5.8](#CNX_Econ_C05_019) (a). That is, a surge in
production leads to a severe drop in price that can actually decrease
the total revenue that farmers receive. Conversely, poor weather or
other conditions that cause a terrible year for farm production can
sharply raise prices so that the total revenue that the farmer receives
increases. The Clear It Up box discusses how these issues relate to
coffee.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### How do coffee prices fluctuate? {#how-do-coffee-prices-fluctuate .Heading4Grey}

Coffee is an international crop. The top five coffee-exporting nations
are Brazil, Vietnam, Colombia, Indonesia, and Ethiopia. In these nations
and others, 20 million families depend on selling coffee beans as their
main source of income. These families are exposed to enormous risk,
because the world price of coffee bounces up and down. For example, in
1993, the world price of coffee was about 50 cents per pound. In 1995 it
was four times as high, at \$2 per pound. By 1997 it had fallen by half
to \$1.00 per pound. In 1998 it leaped back up to \$2 per pound. By 2001
it had fallen back to 46 cents a pound. By early 2011 it rose to about
\$2.31 per pound. By the end of 2012, the price had fallen back to about
\$1.31 per pound. Since then, the price of coffee has continued to
fluctuate.

The reason for these price fluctuations lies in a combination of
inelastic demand and shifts in supply. The elasticity of coffee demand
is only about 0.3; that is, a 10% rise in the price of coffee leads to a
decline of about 3% in the quantity of coffee consumed. When a major
frost hit the Brazilian coffee crop in 1994, coffee supply shifted to
the left with an inelastic demand curve, leading to much higher prices.
Conversely, when Vietnam entered the world coffee market as a major
producer in the late 1990s, the supply curve shifted out to the right.
With a highly inelastic demand curve, coffee prices fell dramatically.
[Figure 5.8](#CNX_Econ_C05_019) (a) illustrates this situation.

Elasticity also reveals whether firms can pass higher costs that they
incur on to consumers. Addictive substances, for which demand is
inelastic, are products for which producers can pass higher costs on to
consumers. For example, the demand for cigarettes is relatively
inelastic among regular smokers who are somewhat addicted. Economic
research suggests that increasing cigarette prices by 10% leads to about
a 3% reduction in the quantity of cigarettes that adults smoke, so the
elasticity of demand for cigarettes is 0.3. If society increases taxes
on companies that produce cigarettes, the result will be, as in [Figure
5.9](#CNX_Econ_C05_020) (a), that the supply curve shifts from S~0~ to
S~1~. However, as the equilibrium moves from E~0~ to E~1~, governments
mainly pass along these taxes to consumers in the form of higher prices.
These higher taxes on cigarettes will raise tax revenue for the
government, but they will not much affect the quantity of smoking.

If the goal is to reduce the quantity of cigarettes demanded, we must
achieve it by shifting this inelastic demand back to the left, perhaps
with public programs to discourage cigarette use or to help people to
quit. For example, anti-smoking advertising campaigns have shown some
ability to reduce smoking. However, if cigarette demand were more
elastic, as in [Figure 5.9](#CNX_Econ_C05_020) (b), then an increase in
taxes that shifts supply from S~0~ to S~1~ and equilibrium from E~0~ to
E~1~ would reduce the quantity of cigarettes smoked substantially. Youth
smoking seems to be more elastic than adult smoking---that is, the
quantity of youth smoking will fall by a greater percentage than the
quantity of adult smoking in response to a given percentage increase in
price.

![](media/rId31.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.965in"}

Figure 5.9 Passing along Higher Costs to Consumers Higher costs, like a
higher tax on cigarette companies for the example we gave in the text,
lead supply to shift to the left. This shift is identical in (a) and
(b). However, in (a), where demand is inelastic, companies largely can
pass the cost increase along to consumers in the form of higher prices,
without much of a decline in equilibrium quantity. In (b), demand is
elastic, so the shift in supply results primarily in a lower equilibrium
quantity. Consumers do not benefit in either case, but in (a), they pay
a higher price for the same quantity, while in (b), they must buy a
lower quantity (and presumably needing to shift their consumption
elsewhere).

### Elasticity and Tax Incidence

The example of cigarette taxes demonstrated that because demand is
inelastic, taxes are not effective at reducing the equilibrium quantity
of smoking, and they are mainly passed along to consumers in the form of
higher prices. The analysis, or manner, of how a tax burden is divided
between consumers and producers is called tax incidence. Typically, the
tax incidence, or burden, falls both on the consumers and producers of
the taxed good. However, if one wants to predict which group will bear
most of the burden, all one needs to do is examine the elasticity of
demand and supply. In the tobacco example, the tax burden falls on the
most inelastic side of the market.

If demand is more inelastic than supply, consumers bear most of the tax
burden, and if supply is more inelastic than demand, sellers bear most
of the tax burden.

The intuition for this is simple. When the demand is inelastic,
consumers are not very responsive to price changes, and the quantity
demanded reduces only modestly when the tax is introduced. In the case
of smoking, the demand is inelastic because consumers are addicted to
the product. The government can then pass the tax burden along to
consumers in the form of higher prices, without much of a decline in the
equilibrium quantity.

Similarly, when a government introduces a tax in a market with an
inelastic supply, such as, for example, beachfront hotels, and sellers
have no alternative than to accept lower prices for their business,
taxes do not greatly affect the equilibrium quantity. The tax burden now
passes on to the sellers. If the supply was elastic and sellers had the
possibility of reorganizing their businesses to avoid supplying the
taxed good, the tax burden on the sellers would be much smaller. The tax
would result in a much lower quantity sold instead of lower prices
received. [Figure 5.10](#CNX_Econ_C05_025) illustrates this relationship
between the tax incidence and elasticity of demand and supply.

![](media/rId37.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.74in"}

Figure 5.10 Elasticity and Tax Incidence An excise tax introduces a
wedge between the price paid by consumers (Pc) and the price received by
producers (Pp). The vertical distance between Pc and Pp is the amount of
the tax per unit. Pe is the equilibrium price prior to introduction of
the tax. (a) When the demand is more elastic than supply, the tax
incidence on consumers Pc -- Pe is lower than the tax incidence on
producers Pe -- Pp. (b) When the supply is more elastic than demand, the
tax incidence on consumers Pc -- Pe is larger than the tax incidence on
producers Pe -- Pp. The more elastic the demand and supply curves, the
lower the tax revenue.

In [Figure 5.10](#CNX_Econ_C05_025) (a), the supply is inelastic and the
demand is elastic, such as in the example of beachfront hotels. While
consumers may have other vacation choices, sellers can't easily move
their businesses. By introducing a tax, the government essentially
creates a wedge between the price paid by consumers Pc and the price
received by producers Pp. In other words, of the total price paid by
consumers, part is retained by the sellers and part is paid to the
government in the form of a tax. The distance between Pc and Pp is the
tax rate. The new market price is Pc, but sellers receive only Pp per
unit sold, as they pay Pc-Pp to the government. Since we can view a tax
as raising the costs of production, this could also be represented by a
leftward shift of the supply curve, where the new supply curve would
intercept the demand at the new quantity Qt. For simplicity, [Figure
5.10](#CNX_Econ_C05_025) omits the shift in the supply curve.

The tax revenue is given by the shaded area, which we obtain by
multiplying the tax per unit by the total quantity sold Qt. The tax
incidence on the consumers is given by the difference between the price
paid Pc and the initial equilibrium price Pe. The tax incidence on the
sellers is given by the difference between the initial equilibrium price
Pe and the price they receive after the tax is introduced Pp. In [Figure
5.10](#CNX_Econ_C05_025) (a), the tax burden falls disproportionately on
the sellers, and a larger proportion of the tax revenue (the shaded
area) is due to the resulting lower price received by the sellers than
by the resulting higher prices paid by the buyers. [Figure
5.10](#CNX_Econ_C05_025) (b) describes the example of the tobacco excise
tax where the supply is more elastic than demand. The tax incidence now
falls disproportionately on consumers, as shown by the large difference
between the price they pay, Pc, and the initial equilibrium price, Pe.
Sellers receive a lower price than before the tax, but this difference
is much smaller than the change in consumers' price. From this analysis
one can also predict whether a tax is likely to create a large revenue
or not. The more elastic the demand curve, the more likely that
consumers will reduce quantity instead of paying higher prices. The more
elastic the supply curve, the more likely that sellers will reduce the
quantity sold, instead of taking lower prices. In a market where both
the demand and supply are very elastic, the imposition of an excise tax
generates low revenue.

Some believe that excise taxes hurt mainly the specific industries they
target. For example, the medical device excise tax, which was
implemented in 2013, has been controversial for it can delay industry
profitability and therefore hamper start-ups and medical innovation. The
tax was repealed in late 2019. However, whether the tax burden falls
mostly on the medical device industry or on the patients depends simply
on the elasticity of demand and supply.

### Long-Run vs. Short-Run Impact

Elasticities are often lower in the short run than in the long run. On
the demand side of the market, it can sometimes be difficult to change
Qd in the short run, but easier in the long run. Consumption of energy
is a clear example. In the short run, it is not easy for a person to
make substantial changes in energy consumption. Maybe you can carpool to
work sometimes or adjust your home thermostat by a few degrees if the
cost of energy rises, but that is about all. However, in the long run
you can purchase a car that gets more miles to the gallon, choose a job
that is closer to where you live, buy more energy-efficient home
appliances, or install more insulation in your home. As a result, the
elasticity of demand for energy is somewhat inelastic in the short run,
but much more elastic in the long run.

[Figure 5.11](#CNX_Econ_C05_021) is an example, based roughly on
historical experience, for the responsiveness of Qd to price changes. In
1973, the price of crude oil was \$12 per barrel and total consumption
in the U.S. economy was 17 million barrels per day. That year, the
nations who were members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) cut off oil exports to the United States for six months
because the Arab members of OPEC disagreed with the U.S. support for
Israel. OPEC did not bring exports back to their earlier levels until
1975---a policy that we can interpret as a shift of the supply curve to
the left in the U.S. petroleum market. [Figure 5.11](#CNX_Econ_C05_021)
(a) and [Figure 5.11](#CNX_Econ_C05_021) (b) show the same original
equilibrium point and the same identical shift of a supply curve to the
left from S~0~ to S~1~.

![](media/rId42.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.985in"}

Figure 5.11 How a Shift in Supply Can Affect Price or Quantity The
intersection (E~0~) between demand curve D and supply curve S~0~ is the
same in both (a) and (b). The shift of supply to the left from S~0~ to
S~1~ is identical in both (a) and (b). The new equilibrium (E~1~) has a
higher price and a lower quantity than the original equilibrium (E~0~)
in both (a) and (b). However, the shape of the demand curve D is
different in (a) and (b), being more elastic in (b) than in (a). As a
result, the shift in supply can result either in a new equilibrium with
a much higher price and an only slightly smaller quantity, as in (a),
with more inelastic demand, or in a new equilibrium with only a small
increase in price and a relatively larger reduction in quantity, as in
(b), with more elastic demand.

[Figure 5.11](#CNX_Econ_C05_021) (a) shows inelastic demand for oil in
the short run similar to that which existed for the United States in
1973. In [Figure 5.11](#CNX_Econ_C05_021) (a), the new equilibrium
(E~1~) occurs at a price of \$25 per barrel, roughly double the price
before the OPEC shock, and an equilibrium quantity of 16 million barrels
per day. [Figure 5.11](#CNX_Econ_C05_021) (b) shows what the outcome
would have been if the U.S. demand for oil had been more elastic, a
result more likely over the long term. This alternative equilibrium
(E~1~) would have resulted in a smaller price increase to \$14 per
barrel and larger reduction in equilibrium quantity to 13 million
barrels per day. In 1983, for example, U.S. petroleum consumption was
15.3 million barrels a day, which was lower than in 1973 or 1975. U.S.
petroleum consumption was down even though the U.S. economy was about
one-fourth larger in 1983 than it had been in 1973. The primary reason
for the lower quantity was that higher energy prices spurred
conservation efforts, and after a decade of home insulation, more
fuel-efficient cars, more efficient appliances and machinery, and other
fuel-conserving choices, the demand curve for energy had become more
elastic.

On the supply side of markets, producers of goods and services typically
find it easier to expand production in the long term of several years
rather than in the short run of a few months. After all, in the short
run it can be costly or difficult to build a new factory, hire many new
workers, or open new stores. However, over a few years, all of these are
possible.

In most markets for goods and services, prices bounce up and down more
than quantities in the short run, but quantities often move more than
prices in the long run. The underlying reason for this pattern is that
supply and demand are often inelastic in the short run, so that shifts
in either demand or supply can cause a relatively greater change in
prices. However, since supply and demand are more elastic in the long
run, the long-run movements in prices are more muted, while quantity
adjusts more easily in the long run.
