## Problems

33\.

The equation for a demand curve is P = 48 -- 3Q. What is the elasticity
in moving from a quantity of 5 to a quantity of 6?

34\.

The equation for a demand curve is P = 2/Q. What is the elasticity of
demand as price falls from 5 to 4? What is the elasticity of demand as
the price falls from 9 to 8? Would you expect these answers to be the
same?

35\.

The equation for a supply curve is 4P = Q. What is the elasticity of
supply as price rises from 3 to 4? What is the elasticity of supply as
the price rises from 7 to 8? Would you expect these answers to be the
same?

36\.

The equation for a supply curve is P = 3Q -- 8. What is the elasticity
in moving from a price of 4 to a price of 7?

37\.

The supply of paintings by Leonardo Da Vinci, who painted the *Mona
Lisa* and *The Last Supper* and died in 1519, is highly inelastic.
Sketch a supply and demand diagram, paying attention to the appropriate
elasticities, to illustrate that demand for these paintings will
determine the price.

38\.

Say that a certain stadium for professional football has 70,000 seats.
What is the shape of the supply curve for tickets to football games at
that stadium? Explain.

39\.

When someone's kidneys fail, the person needs to have medical treatment
with a dialysis machine (unless or until they receive a kidney
transplant) or they will die. Sketch a supply and demand diagram, paying
attention to the appropriate elasticities, to illustrate that the supply
of such dialysis machines will primarily determine the price.

40\.

Assume that the supply of low-skilled workers is fairly elastic, but the
employers' demand for such workers is fairly inelastic. If the policy
goal is to expand employment for low-skilled workers, is it better to
focus on policy tools to shift the supply of unskilled labor or on tools
to shift the demand for unskilled labor? What if the policy goal is to
raise wages for this group? Explain your answers with supply and demand
diagrams.
