## 6.3 Behavioral Economics: An Alternative Framework for Consumer Choice

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Evaluate the reasons for making intertemporal choices
-   Interpret an intertemporal budget constraint
-   Analyze why people in America tend to save such a small percentage
    of their income

As we know, people sometimes make decisions that seem "irrational" and
not in their own best interest. People's decisions can seem inconsistent
from one day to the next and they even deliberately ignore ways to save
money or time. The traditional economic models assume rationality, which
means that people take all available information and make consistent and
informed decisions that are in their best interest. (In fact, economics
professors often delight in pointing out so-called "irrational behavior"
each semester to their new students, and present economics as a way to
become more rational.)

However, a new group of economists, known as behavioral economists,
argue that the traditional method omits something important: people's
state of mind. For example, one can think differently about money if one
is feeling revenge, optimism, or loss. These are not necessarily
irrational states of mind, but part of a range of emotions that can
affect anyone on a given day. In addition, actions under these
conditions are predictable, if one better understands the underlying
environment. Behavioral economics seeks to enrich our understanding of
decision-making by integrating the insights of psychology into
economics. It does this by investigating how given dollar amounts can
mean different things to individuals depending on the situation. This
can lead to decisions that appear outwardly inconsistent, or irrational,
to the outside observer.

The way the mind works, according to this view, may seem inconsistent to
traditional economists but is actually far more complex than an
unemotional cost-benefit adding machine. For example, a traditional
economist would say that if you lost a \$10 bill today, and also
received an extra \$10 in your paycheck, you should feel perfectly
neutral. After all, --\$10 + \$10 = \$0. You are the same financially as
you were before. However, behavioral economists have conducted research
that shows many people will feel some negative emotion, such as anger or
frustration, after those two things happen. We tend to focus more on the
loss than the gain. We call this loss aversion, where a \$1 loss pains
us 2.25 times more than a \$1 gain helps us, according to the economists
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in a famous 1979 article in the journal
*Econometrica*. This insight has implications for investing, as people
tend to "overplay" the stock market by reacting more to losses than to
gains. This behavior looks irrational to traditional economists, but is
consistent once we understand better how the mind works, these
economists argue.

Traditional economists also assume human beings have complete self
control, but, for instance, people will buy cigarettes by the pack
instead of the carton even though the carton saves them money, to keep
usage down. They purchase locks for their refrigerators and overpay on
taxes to force themselves to save. In other words, we protect ourselves
from our worst temptations but pay a price to do so. One way behavioral
economists are responding to this is by establishing ways for people to
keep themselves free of these temptations. This includes what we call
"nudges" toward more rational behavior rather than mandatory regulations
from government. For example, up to 20 percent of new employees do not
enroll in retirement savings plans immediately, because of
procrastination or feeling overwhelmed by the different choices. Some
companies are now moving to a new system, where employees are
automatically enrolled unless they "opt out." Almost no-one opts out in
this program and employees begin saving at the early years, which are
most critical for retirement.

Another area that seems illogical is the idea of mental accounting, or
putting dollars in different mental categories where they take different
values. Economists typically consider dollars to be fungible, or having
equal value to the individual, regardless of the situation.

You might, for instance, think of the \$25 you found in the street
differently from the \$25 you earned from three hours working in a fast
food restaurant. You might treat the street money as "mad money" with
little rational regard to getting the best value. This is in one sense
strange, since it is still equivalent to three hours of hard work in the
restaurant. Yet the "easy come-easy go" mentality replaces the rational
economizer because of the situation, or context, in which you attained
the money.

In another example of mental accounting that seems inconsistent to a
traditional economist, a person could carry a credit card debt of
\$1,000 that has a 15% yearly interest cost, and simultaneously have a
\$2,000 savings account that pays only 2% per year. That means she pays
\$150 a year to the credit card company, while collecting only \$40
annually in bank interest, so she loses \$110 a year. That doesn't seem
wise.

The "rational" decision would be to pay off the debt, since a \$1,000
savings account with \$0 in debt is the equivalent net worth, and she
would now net \$20 per year. Curiously, it is not uncommon for people to
ignore this advice, since they will treat a loss to their savings
account as higher than the benefit of paying off their credit card. They
do not treat the dollars as fungible so it looks irrational to
traditional economists.

Which view is right, the behavioral economists' or the traditional view?
Both have their advantages, but behavioral economists have at least
identified trying to describe and explain behavior that economists have
historically dismissed as irrational. If most of us are engaged in some
"irrational behavior," perhaps there are deeper underlying reasons for
this behavior in the first place.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Making Choices {#making-choices .Heading4Grey}

In what category did consumers worldwide increase their spending during
the Great Recession? Higher education. According to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), enrollment
in colleges and universities rose one-third in China and almost
two-thirds in Saudi Arabia, nearly doubled in Pakistan, tripled in
Uganda, and surged by three million---18 percent---in the United States.
Why were consumers willing to spend on education during lean times? Both
individuals and countries view higher education as the way to
prosperity. Many feel that increased earnings are a significant benefit
of attending college.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data from May 2012 supports this view,
as [Figure 6.6](#CNX_Econ_C06_010) shows. They show a positive
correlation between earnings and education. The data also indicate that
unemployment rates fall with higher levels of education and training.

Why spend the money to go to college during recession? Because if you
are unemployed (or underemployed, working fewer hours than you would
like), the opportunity cost of your time is low. If you're unemployed,
you don't have to give up work hours and income by going to college.

![](media/rId25.jpeg){width="6.36in" height="3.275in"}

Figure 6.6 The Impact of Education on Earnings and Unemployment Rates,
2012 Those with the highest degrees in 2012 had substantially lower
unemployment rates; whereas, those with the least formal education
suffered from the highest unemployment rates. The national median
average weekly income was \$815, and the nation unemployment average in
2012 was 6.8%. (Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 22, 2013)
