## Key Concepts and Summary

### 6.1 Consumption Choices

Economic analysis of household behavior is based on the assumption that
people seek the highest level of utility or satisfaction. Individuals
are the only judge of their own utility. In general, greater consumption
of a good brings higher total utility. However, the additional utility
people receive from each unit of greater consumption tends to decline in
a pattern of diminishing marginal utility.

We can find the utility-maximizing choice on a consumption budget
constraint in several ways. You can add up total utility of each choice
on the budget line and choose the highest total. You can select a
starting point at random and compare the marginal utility gains and
losses of moving to neighboring points---and thus eventually seek out
the preferred choice. Alternatively, you can compare the ratio of the
marginal utility to price of good 1 with the marginal utility to price
of good 2 and apply the rule that at the optimal choice, the two ratios
should be equal:

![multiline equation row 1 MU sub one divided by cap P sub one equals MU
sub two divided by cap P sub
two](media/rId21.png){width="0.7708333333333334in"
height="0.22916666666666666in"}

### 6.2 How Changes in Income and Prices Affect Consumption Choices

The budget constraint framework suggest that when income or price
changes, a range of responses are possible. When income rises,
households will demand a higher quantity of normal goods, but a lower
quantity of inferior goods. When the price of a good rises, households
will typically demand less of that good---but whether they will demand a
much lower quantity or only a slightly lower quantity will depend on
personal preferences. Also, a higher price for one good can lead to more
or less demand of the other good.

### 6.3 Behavioral Economics: An Alternative Framework for Consumer Choice

People regularly make decisions that seem less than rational, decisions
that contradict traditional consumer theory. This is because traditional
theory ignores people's state of mind or feelings, which can influence
behavior. For example, people tend to value a dollar lost more than a
dollar gained, even though the amounts are the same. Similarly, many
people over withhold on their taxes, essentially giving the government a
free loan until they file their tax returns, so that they are more
likely to get money back than have to pay money on their taxes.
