![](media/rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="4.335in"}

Figure 8.1 Depending on the competition and prices offered, a soybean
farmer may choose to grow a different crop. (Credit: modification
"Agronomist & Farmer Inspecting Weeds" by United Soybean Board/Flickr,
CC BY 2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   Perfect Competition and Why It Matters
-   How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions
-   Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run
-   Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets

## Introduction to Perfect Competition

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### A Dime a Dozen {#a-dime-a-dozen .Heading4Grey}

When you were younger did you babysit, deliver papers, or mow the lawn
for money? If so, you faced stiff competition from many other
competitors who offered identical services. There was nothing to stop
others from also offering their services.

All of you charged the "going rate." If you tried to charge more, your
customers would simply buy from someone else. These conditions are very
similar to the conditions agricultural growers face.

Growing a crop may be more difficult to start than a babysitting or lawn
mowing service, but growers face the same fierce competition. In the
grand scale of world agriculture, farmers face competition from
thousands of others because they sell an identical product. After all,
winter wheat is winter wheat, but if they find it hard to make money
with that crop, it is relatively easy for farmers to leave the
marketplace for another crop. In this case, they do not sell the family
farm, they switch crops.

Take the case of the upper Midwest region of the United States---for
many generations the area was called "King Wheat." According to the
United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics
Service, statistics by state, in 1997, 11.6 million acres of wheat and
780,000 acres of corn were planted in North Dakota. In the intervening
25 or so years has the mix of crops changed? Since it is relatively easy
to switch crops, did farmers change what they planted in response to
changes in relative crop prices? We will find out at chapter's end.

In the meantime, let\'s consider the topic of this chapter---the
perfectly competitive market. This is a market in which entry and exit
are relatively easy and competitors are "a dime a dozen."

Most businesses face two realities: no one is required to buy their
products, and even customers who might want those products may buy from
other businesses instead. Firms that operate in perfectly competitive
markets face this reality. In this chapter, you will learn how such
firms make decisions about how much to produce, how much profit they
make, whether to stay in business or not, and many others. Industries
differ from one another in terms of how many sellers there are in a
specific market, how easy or difficult it is for a new firm to enter,
and the type of products that they sell. Economists refer to this as an
industry\'s market structure. In this chapter, we focus on perfect
competition. However, in other chapters we will examine other industry
types:
[Monopoly](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/9-introduction-to-a-monopoly)
and [Monopolistic Competition and
Oligopoly](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/10-introduction-to-monopolistic-competition-and-oligopoly).
