## Problems

39\.

The AAA Aquarium Co. sells aquariums for \$20 each. Fixed costs of
production are \$20. The total variable costs are \$20 for one aquarium,
\$25 for two units, \$35 for the three units, \$50 for four units, and
\$80 for five units. In the form of a table, calculate total revenue,
marginal revenue, total cost, and marginal cost for each output level
(one to five units). What is the profit-maximizing quantity of output?
On one diagram, sketch the total revenue and total cost curves. On
another diagram, sketch the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves.

40\.

Perfectly competitive firm Doggies Paradise Inc. sells winter coats for
dogs. Dog coats sell for \$72 each. The fixed costs of production are
\$100. The total variable costs are \$64 for one unit, \$84 for two
units, \$114 for three units, \$184 for four units, and \$270 for five
units. In the form of a table, calculate total revenue, marginal
revenue, total cost and marginal cost for each output level (one to five
units). On one diagram, sketch the total revenue and total cost curves.
On another diagram, sketch the marginal revenue and marginal cost
curves. What is the profit maximizing quantity?

41\.

A computer company produces affordable, easy-to-use home computer
systems and has fixed costs of \$250. The marginal cost of producing
computers is \$700 for the first computer, \$250 for the second, \$300
for the third, \$350 for the fourth, \$400 for the fifth, \$450 for the
sixth, and \$500 for the seventh.

a.  Create a table that shows the company's output, total cost, marginal
    cost, average cost, variable cost, and average variable cost.
b.  At what price is the zero-profit point? At what price is the
    shutdown point?
c.  If the company sells the computers for \$500, is it making a profit
    or a loss? How big is the profit or loss? Sketch a graph with AC,
    MC, and AVC curves to illustrate your answer and show the profit or
    loss.
d.  If the firm sells the computers for \$300, is it making a profit or
    a loss? How big is the profit or loss? Sketch a graph with AC, MC,
    and AVC curves to illustrate your answer and show the profit or
    loss.
