## Self-Check Questions

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod01_sques01-solution).

Firms in a perfectly competitive market are said to be "price
takers"---that is, once the market determines an equilibrium price for
the product, firms must accept this price. If you sell a product in a
perfectly competitive market, but you are not happy with its price,
would you raise the price, even by a cent?

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod01_sques02-solution).

Would independent trucking fit the characteristics of a perfectly
competitive industry?

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod02_sques01-solution).

Look at [Table 8.13](#ch08mod02_tab12). What would happen to the firm's
profits if the market price increases to \$6 per pack of raspberries?

Table 8.13

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod02_sques02-solution).

Suppose that the market price increases to \$6, as [Table
8.14](#ch08mod02_tab13) shows. What would happen to the
profit-maximizing output level?

Table 8.14

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod02_sques03-solution).

Explain in words why a profit-maximizing firm will not choose to produce
at a quantity where marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue.

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod02_sques04-solution).

A firm's marginal cost curve above the average variable cost curve is
equal to the firm's individual supply curve. This means that every time
a firm receives a price from the market it will be willing to supply the
amount of output where the price equals marginal cost. What happens to
the firm's individual supply curve if marginal costs increase?

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod03_sques01-solution).

If new technology in a perfectly competitive market brings about a
substantial reduction in costs of production, how will this affect the
market?

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod03_sques02-solution).

A market in perfect competition is in long-run equilibrium. What happens
to the market if labor unions are able to increase wages for workers?

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod04_sques01-solution).

Productive efficiency and allocative efficiency are two concepts
achieved in the long run in a perfectly competitive market. These are
the two reasons why we call them "perfect." How would you use these two
concepts to analyze other market structures and label them "imperfect?"

[10](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-8#ch08mod04_sques02-solution).

Explain how the profit-maximizing rule of setting P = MC leads a
perfectly competitive market to be allocatively efficient.
