## Key Concepts and Summary

### 9.1 How Monopolies Form: Barriers to Entry

Barriers to entry prevent or discourage competitors from entering the
market. These barriers include: economies of scale that lead to natural
monopoly; control of a physical resource; legal restrictions on
competition; patent, trademark and copyright protection; and practices
to intimidate the competition like predatory pricing. Intellectual
property refers to legally guaranteed ownership of an idea, rather than
a physical item. The laws that protect intellectual property include
patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets. A natural monopoly
arises when economies of scale persist over a large enough range of
output that if one firm supplies the entire market, no other firm can
enter without facing a cost disadvantage.

### 9.2 How a Profit-Maximizing Monopoly Chooses Output and Price

A monopolist is not a price taker, because when it decides what quantity
to produce, it also determines the market price. For a monopolist, total
revenue is relatively low at low quantities of output, because it is not
selling much. Total revenue is also relatively low at very high
quantities of output, because a very high quantity will sell only at a
low price. Thus, total revenue for a monopolist will start low, rise,
and then decline. The marginal revenue for a monopolist from selling
additional units will decline. Each additional unit a monopolist sells
will push down the overall market price, and as it sells more units,
this lower price applies to increasingly more units.

The monopolist will select the profit-maximizing level of output where
MR = MC, and then charge the price for that quantity of output as
determined by the market demand curve. If that price is above average
cost, the monopolist earns positive profits.

Monopolists are not productively efficient, because they do not produce
at the minimum of the average cost curve. Monopolists are not
allocatively efficient, because they do not produce at the quantity
where P = MC. As a result, monopolists produce less, at a higher average
cost, and charge a higher price than would a combination of firms in a
perfectly competitive industry. Monopolists also may lack incentives for
innovation, because they need not fear entry.
