## Chapter 10

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/10-self-check-questions#fs-idm64669072).

An increase in demand will manifest itself as a rightward shift in the
demand curve, and a rightward shift in marginal revenue. The shift in
marginal revenue will cause a movement up the marginal cost curve to the
new intersection between MR and MC at a higher level of output. The new
price can be read by drawing a line up from the new output level to the
new demand curve, and then over to the vertical axis. The new price
should be higher. The increase in quantity will cause a movement along
the average cost curve to a possibly higher level of average cost. The
price, though, will increase more, causing an increase in total profits.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/10-self-check-questions#fs-idm141628400).

As long as the original firm is earning positive economic profits, other
firms will respond in ways that take away the original firm's profits.
This will manifest itself as a decrease in demand for the original
firm's product, a decrease in the firm's profit-maximizing price and a
decrease in the firm's profit-maximizing level of output, essentially
unwinding the process described in the answer to question 1. In the
long-run equilibrium, all firms in monopolistically competitive markets
will earn zero economic profits.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/10-self-check-questions#fs-idm16606608).

a.  If the firms form a cartel, they will act like a monopoly, choosing
    the quantity of output where MR = MC. Drawing a line from the
    monopoly quantity up to the demand curve shows the monopoly price.
    Assuming that fixed costs are zero, and with an understanding of
    cost and profit, we can infer that when the marginal cost curve is
    horizontal, average cost is the same as marginal cost. Thus, the
    cartel will earn positive economic profits equal to the area of the
    rectangle, with a base equal to the monopoly quantity and a height
    equal to the difference between price (on the demand above the
    monopoly quantity) and average cost, as shown in the following
    figure.

-   ![](media/rId25.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.38in"}

b.  The firms will expand output and cut price as long as there are
    profits remaining. The long-run equilibrium will occur at the point
    where average cost equals demand. As a result, the oligopoly will
    earn zero economic profits due to "cutthroat competition," as shown
    in the next figure.

-   ![](media/rId27.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.38in"}

c.  Pc \> Pcc. Qc \< Qcc. Profit for the cartel is positive and large.
    Profit for cutthroat competition is zero.

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/10-self-check-questions#fs-idp37882656).

Firm B reasons that if it cheats and Firm A does not notice, it will
double its money. Since Firm A's profits will decline substantially,
however, it is likely that Firm A will notice and if so, Firm A will
cheat also, with the result that Firm B will lose 90% of what it gained
by cheating. Firm A will reason that Firm B is unlikely to risk
cheating. If neither firm cheats, Firm A earns \$1000. If Firm A cheats,
assuming Firm B does not cheat, A can boost its profits only a little,
since Firm B is so small. If both firms cheat, then Firm A loses at
least 50% of what it could have earned. The possibility of a small gain
(\$50) is probably not enough to induce Firm A to cheat, so in this case
it is likely that both firms will collude.
