## 1.2 Microeconomics and Macroeconomics

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Describe microeconomics
-   Describe macroeconomics
-   Contrast monetary policy and fiscal policy

Economics is concerned with the well-being of *all* people, including
those with jobs and those without jobs, as well as those with high
incomes and those with low incomes. Economics acknowledges that
production of useful goods and services can create problems of
environmental pollution. It explores the question of how investing in
education helps to develop workers' skills. It probes questions like how
to tell when big businesses or big labor unions are operating in a way
that benefits society as a whole and when they are operating in a way
that benefits their owners or members at the expense of others. It looks
at how government spending, taxes, and regulations affect decisions
about production and consumption.

It should be clear by now that economics covers considerable ground. We
can divide that ground into two parts: Microeconomics focuses on the
actions of individual agents within the economy, like households,
workers, and businesses. Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole.
It focuses on broad issues such as growth of production, the number of
unemployed people, the inflationary increase in prices, government
deficits, and levels of exports and imports. Microeconomics and
macroeconomics are not separate subjects, but rather complementary
perspectives on the overall subject of the economy.

To understand why both microeconomic and macroeconomic perspectives are
useful, consider the problem of studying a biological ecosystem like a
lake. One person who sets out to study the lake might focus on specific
topics: certain kinds of algae or plant life; the characteristics of
particular fish or snails; or the trees surrounding the lake. Another
person might take an overall view and instead consider the lake\'s
ecosystem from top to bottom; what eats what, how the system stays in a
rough balance, and what environmental stresses affect this balance. Both
approaches are useful, and both examine the same lake, but the
viewpoints are different. In a similar way, both microeconomics and
macroeconomics study the same economy, but each has a different
viewpoint.

Whether you are scrutinizing lakes or economics, the micro and the macro
insights should blend with each other. In studying a lake, the micro
insights about particular plants and animals help to understand the
overall food chain, while the macro insights about the overall food
chain help to explain the environment in which individual plants and
animals live.

In economics, the micro decisions of individual businesses are
influenced by whether the macroeconomy is healthy. For example, firms
will be more likely to hire workers if the overall economy is growing.
In turn, macroeconomy\'s performance ultimately depends on the
microeconomic decisions that individual households and businesses make.

### Microeconomics

What determines how households and individuals spend their budgets? What
combination of goods and services will best fit their needs and wants,
given the budget they have to spend? How do people decide whether to
work, and if so, whether to work full time or part time? How do people
decide how much to save for the future, or whether they should borrow to
spend beyond their current means?

What determines the products, and how many of each, a firm will produce
and sell? What determines the prices a firm will charge? What determines
how a firm will produce its products? What determines how many workers
it will hire? How will a firm finance its business? When will a firm
decide to expand, downsize, or even close? In the microeconomics part of
this book, we will learn about the theory of consumer behavior, the
theory of the firm, how markets for labor and other resources work, and
how markets sometimes fail to work properly.

### Macroeconomics

What determines the level of economic activity in a society? In other
words, what determines how many goods and services a nation actually
produces? What determines how many jobs are available in an economy?
What determines a nation's standard of living? What causes the economy
to speed up or slow down? What causes firms to hire more workers or to
lay them off? Finally, what causes the economy to grow over the long
term?

We can determine an economy\'s macroeconomic health by examining a
number of goals: growth in the standard of living, low unemployment, and
low inflation, to name the most important. How can we use government
macroeconomic policy to pursue these goals? A nation\'s central bank
conducts monetary policy, which involves policies that affect bank
lending, interest rates, and financial capital markets. For the United
States, this is the Federal Reserve. A nation\'s legislative body
determines fiscal policy, which involves government spending and taxes.
For the United States, this is the Congress and the executive branch,
which originates the federal budget. These are the government\'s main
tools. Americans tend to expect that government can fix whatever
economic problems we encounter, but to what extent is that expectation
realistic? These are just some of the issues that we will explore in the
macroeconomic chapters of this book.
