## Key Concepts and Summary

### 1.1 What Is Economics, and Why Is It Important?

Economics seeks to solve the problem of scarcity, which is when human
wants for goods and services exceed the available supply. A modern
economy displays a division of labor, in which people earn income by
specializing in what they produce and then use that income to purchase
the products they need or want. The division of labor allows individuals
and firms to specialize and to produce more for several reasons: a) It
allows the agents to focus on areas of advantage due to natural factors
and skill levels; b) It encourages the agents to learn and invent; c) It
allows agents to take advantage of economies of scale. Division and
specialization of labor only work when individuals can purchase what
they do not produce in markets. Learning about economics helps you
understand the major problems facing the world today, prepares you to be
a good citizen, and helps you become a well-rounded thinker.

### 1.2 Microeconomics and Macroeconomics

Microeconomics and macroeconomics are two different perspectives on the
economy. The microeconomic perspective focuses on parts of the economy:
individuals, firms, and industries. The macroeconomic perspective looks
at the economy as a whole, focusing on goals like growth in the standard
of living, unemployment, and inflation. Macroeconomics has two types of
policies for pursuing these goals: monetary policy and fiscal policy.

### 1.3 How Economists Use Theories and Models to Understand Economic Issues

Economists analyze problems differently than do other disciplinary
experts. The main tools economists use are economic theories or models.
A theory is not an illustration of the answer to a problem. Rather, a
theory is a tool for determining the answer.

### 1.4 How To Organize Economies: An Overview of Economic Systems

We can organize societies as traditional, command, or market-oriented
economies. Most societies are a mix. The last few decades have seen
globalization evolve as a result of growth in commercial and financial
networks that cross national borders, making businesses and workers from
different economies increasingly interdependent.
