## Problems

19\.

Andrea's Day Spa began to offer a relaxing aromatherapy treatment. The
firm asks you how much to charge to maximize profits. The first two
columns in [Table 10.5](#Table_10_02) provide the price and quantity for
the demand curve for treatments. The third column shows its total costs.
For each level of output, calculate total revenue, marginal revenue,
average cost, and marginal cost. What is the profit-maximizing level of
output for the treatments and how much will the firm earn in profits?

Table 10.5

20\.

Mary and Raj are the only two growers who provide organically grown corn
to a local grocery store. They know that if they cooperated and produced
less corn, they could raise the price of the corn. If they work
independently, they will each earn \$100. If they decide to work
together and both lower their output, they can each earn \$150. If one
person lowers output and the other does not, the person who lowers
output will earn \$0 and the other person will capture the entire market
and will earn \$200. [Table 10.6](#Table_10_06) represents the choices
available to Mary and Raj. What is the best choice for Raj if he is sure
that Mary will cooperate? If Mary thinks Raj will cheat, what should
Mary do and why? What is the prisoner's dilemma result? What is the
preferred choice if they could ensure cooperation? A = Work
independently; B = Cooperate and Lower Output. (Each results entry lists
Raj's earnings first, and Mary\'s earnings second.)

Table 10.6

21\.

Jane and Bill are apprehended for a bank robbery. They are taken into
separate rooms and questioned by the police about their involvement in
the crime. The police tell them each that if they confess and turn the
other person in, they will receive a lighter sentence. If they both
confess, they will be each be sentenced to 30 years. If neither
confesses, they will each receive a 20-year sentence. If only one
confesses, the confessor will receive 15 years and the one who stayed
silent will receive 35 years. [Table 10.7](#Table_10_07) below
represents the choices available to Jane and Bill. If Jane trusts Bill
to stay silent, what should she do? If Jane thinks that Bill will
confess, what should she do? Does Jane have a dominant strategy? Does
Bill have a dominant strategy? A = Confess; B = Stay Silent. (Each
results entry lists Jane's sentence first (in years), and Bill\'s
sentence second.)

Table 10.7
