## 11.2 Regulating Anticompetitive Behavior

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Analyze restrictive practices
-   Explain tying sales, bundling, and predatory pricing
-   Evaluate a real-world situation of possible anticompetitive and
    restrictive practices

The U.S. antitrust laws reach beyond blocking mergers that would reduce
competition to include a wide array of anticompetitive practices. For
example, it is illegal for competitors to form a cartel to collude to
make pricing and output decisions, as if they were a monopoly firm. The
Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice prohibit
firms from agreeing to fix prices or output, rigging bids, or sharing or
dividing markets by allocating customers, suppliers, territories, or
lines of commerce.

In the late 1990s, for example, the antitrust regulators prosecuted an
international cartel of vitamin manufacturers, including the Swiss firm
Hoffman-La Roche, the German firm BASF, and the French firm
Rhone-Poulenc. These firms reached agreements on how much to produce,
how much to charge, and which firm would sell to which customers. Firms
like General Mills, Kellogg, Purina Mills, and Proctor and Gamble bought
the high-priced vitamins, which pushed up the prices more. Hoffman-La
Roche pleaded guilty in May 1999 and agreed both to pay a fine of \$500
million and to have at least one top executive be incarcerated for four
months.

Under U.S. antitrust laws, monopoly itself is not illegal. If a firm has
a monopoly because of a newly patented invention, for example, the law
explicitly allows a firm to earn higher-than-normal profits for a time
as a reward for innovation. If a firm achieves a large share of the
market by producing a better product at a lower price, such behavior is
not prohibited by antitrust law.

### Restrictive Practices

Antitrust law includes rules against restrictive practices---practices
that do not involve outright agreements to raise price or to reduce the
quantity produced, but that might have the effect of reducing
competition. Antitrust cases involving restrictive practices are often
controversial, because they delve into specific contracts or agreements
between firms that are allowed in some cases but not in others.

For example, an exclusive dealing agreement between a manufacturer and a
dealer can be legal or illegal. It is legal if the purpose of the
contract is to encourage competition between dealers. For example, it is
legal for the Ford Motor Company to sell its cars to only Ford dealers,
and for General Motors to sell to only GM dealers, and so on. However,
exclusive deals may also limit competition. If one large retailer
obtained the exclusive rights to be the sole distributor of televisions,
computers, and audio equipment made by a number of companies, then this
exclusive contract would have an anticompetitive effect on other
retailers.

Tying sales happen when a customer is allowed to buy one product only if
the customer also buys a second product. Tying sales are controversial
because they force consumers to purchase a product that they may not
actually want or need. Further, the additional, required products are
not necessarily advantageous to the customer. Suppose that to purchase a
popular DVD, the store required that you also purchase a certain
portable TV model. These products are only loosely related, thus there
is no reason to make the purchase of one contingent on the other. Even
if a customer were interested in a portable TV, the tying to a
particular model prevents the customer from having the option of
selecting one from the numerous types available in the market.

A related, but not identical, concept is bundling, where a firm sells
two or more products as one. Bundling typically offers an advantage for
consumers by allowing them to acquire multiple products or services for
a better price. For example, several cable companies allow customers to
buy products like cable, internet, and a phone line through a special
price available through bundling. Customers are also welcome to purchase
these products separately, but the price of bundling is usually more
appealing.

In some cases, we can view tying sales and bundling as anticompetitive.
However, in other cases they may be legal and even common. It is common
for people to purchase season tickets to a sports team or a set of
concerts so as to guarantee tickets to the few contests or shows that
are most popular and likely to sell out. Computer software manufacturers
may often bundle a number of different programs, even when the buyer
wants only a few. Think about the software that is included in a new
computer purchase, for example.

Recall from the chapter on
[Monopoly](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/9-introduction-to-a-monopoly)
that predatory pricing occurs when the existing firm (or firms) reacts
to a new firm by dropping prices very low, until the new firm is driven
out of the market, at which point the existing firm raises prices again.
This pattern of pricing is aimed at deterring new firms from entering
the market. However, in practice, it can be hard to figure out when
pricing is predatory. Say that American Airlines is flying between two
cities, and a new airline starts flying between the same two cities, at
a lower price. If American Airlines cuts its price to match the new
entrant, is this predatory pricing or is it just market competition at
work? A commonly proposed rule is that if a firm is selling for less
than its average variable cost---that is, at a price where it should be
shutting down---then there is evidence for predatory pricing. However,
calculating in the real world what costs are variable and what costs are
fixed is often not obvious, either.

The Microsoft antitrust case embodies many of these gray areas in
restrictive practices, as the next Clear It Up shows.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### Did Microsoft^Â®^ engage in anticompetitive and restrictive practices? {#did-microsoft-engage-in-anticompetitive-and-restrictive-practices .Heading4Grey}

The most famous restrictive practices case of recent years was a series
of lawsuits by the U.S. government against Microsoft---lawsuits that
some of Microsoft's competitors encouraged. All sides admitted that
Microsoft's Windows program had a near-monopoly position in the market
for the software used in general computer operating systems. All sides
agreed that the software had many satisfied customers and that the
computer software capabilities were compatible with Windows. Software
that Microsoft and other companies produced had expanded dramatically in
the 1990s. Having a monopoly or a near-monopoly is not necessarily
illegal in and of itself, but in cases where one company controls a
great deal of the market, antitrust regulators look at any allegations
of restrictive practices with special care.

The antitrust regulators argued that Microsoft had gone beyond profiting
from its software innovations and its dominant position in the software
market for operating systems, and had tried to use its market power in
operating systems software to take over other parts of the software
industry. For example, the government argued that Microsoft had engaged
in an anticompetitive form of exclusive dealing by threatening computer
makers that, if they did not leave another firm's software off their
machines (specifically, Netscape's Internet browser), then Microsoft
would not sell them its operating system software. Government antitrust
regulators accused Microsoft of tying together its Windows operating
system software, where it had a monopoly, with its Internet Explorer
browser software, where it did not have a monopoly, and thus using this
bundling as an anticompetitive tool. The government also accused
Microsoft of a form of predatory pricing; namely, giving away certain
additional software products for free as part of Windows, as a way of
driving out the competition from other software makers.

In April 2000, a federal court held that Microsoft's behavior had
crossed the line into unfair competition, and recommended that the
company be split into two competing firms. However, the court overturned
that penalty on appeal, and in November 2002 Microsoft reached a
settlement with the government that it would end its restrictive
practices.

The concept of restrictive practices is continually evolving, as firms
seek new ways to earn profits and government regulators define what is
permissible. A situation where the law is evolving and changing is
always somewhat troublesome, since laws are most useful and fair when
firms know what they are in advance. In addition, since the law is open
to interpretation, competitors who are losing out in the market can
accuse successful firms of anticompetitive restrictive practices, and
try to win through government regulation what they have failed to
accomplish in the market. Officials at the Federal Trade Commission and
the Department of Justice are, of course, aware of these issues, but
there is no easy way to resolve them.
