## Self-Check Questions

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idp20050208-solution).

Is it true that a merger between two firms that are not already in the
top four by size can affect both the four-firm concentration ratio and
the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index? Explain briefly.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm32347520-solution).

Is it true that the four-firm concentration ratio puts more emphasis on
one or two very large firms, while the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index puts
more emphasis on all the firms in the entire market? Explain briefly.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idp133328928-solution).

Some years ago, two intercity bus companies, Greyhound Lines, Inc. and
Trailways Transportation System, wanted to merge. One possible
definition of the market in this case was "the market for intercity bus
service." Another possible definition was "the market for intercity
transportation, including personal cars, car rentals, passenger trains,
and commuter air flights." Which definition do you think the bus
companies preferred, and why?

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idp62461936-solution).

As a result of globalization and new information and communications
technology, would you expect that the definitions of markets that
antitrust authorities use will become broader or narrower?

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm57918848-solution).

Why would a firm choose to use one or more of the anticompetitive
practices described in [Regulating Anticompetitive
Behavior](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/11-2-regulating-anticompetitive-behavior)?

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm35141040-solution).

Urban transit systems, especially those with rail systems, typically
experience significant economies of scale in operation. Consider the
transit system data in [Table 11.4](#Table_11_06). Note that the
quantity is in millions of riders.

Table 11.4

Draw the demand, marginal revenue, marginal cost, and average cost
curves. Do they have the normal shapes?

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm151696144-solution).

From the graph you drew to answer [Exercise 11.6](#fs-idm35141040),
would you say this transit system is a natural monopoly? Justify.

Use the following information to answer the next three questions. In the
years before wireless phones, when telephone technology required having
a wire running to every home, it seemed plausible that telephone service
had diminishing average costs and might require regulation like a
natural monopoly. For most of the twentieth century, the national U.S.
phone company was AT&T, and the company functioned as a regulated
monopoly. Think about the deregulation of the U.S. telecommunications
industry that has occurred over the last few decades. (This is not a
research assignment, but a thought assignment based on what you have
learned in this chapter.)

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm85133776-solution).

What real-world changes made the deregulation possible?

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm43695440-solution).

What are some of the benefits of the deregulation?

[10](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-11#fs-idm15499232-solution).

What might some of the negatives of deregulation be?
