## 12.2 Command-and-Control Regulation

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain command-and-control regulation
-   Evaluate the effectiveness of command-and-control regulation

When the United States started passing comprehensive environmental laws
in the late 1960s and early 1970s, a typical law specified to companies
how much pollution their smokestacks or drainpipes could emit and
imposed penalties if companies exceeded the limit. Other laws required
that companies install certain equipment---for example, on automobile
tailpipes or on smokestacks---to reduce pollution. These types of laws,
which specify allowable quantities of pollution and which also may
detail which pollution-control technologies companies must use, fall
under the category of command-and-control regulation. In effect,
command-and-control regulation requires that firms increase their costs
by installing anti-pollution equipment. Thus, firms are required to
account for the social costs of pollution in deciding how much output to
produce.

Command-and-control regulation has been highly successful in protecting
and cleaning up the U.S. environment. In 1970, the Federal government
created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to oversee all
environmental laws. In the same year, Congress enacted the Clean Air Act
to address air pollution. Just two years later, in 1972, Congress passed
and the president signed the far-reaching Clean Water Act. These
command-and-control environmental laws, and their amendments and
updates, have been largely responsible for America's cleaner air and
water in recent decades. However, economists have pointed out three
difficulties with command-and-control environmental regulation.

First, command-and-control regulation offers no incentive to improve the
quality of the environment beyond the standard set by a particular law.
Once firms meet the standard, polluters have zero incentive to do
better.

Second, command-and-control regulation is inflexible. It usually
requires the same standard for all polluters, and often the same
pollution-control technology as well. This means that
command-and-control regulation draws no distinctions between firms that
would find it easy and inexpensive to meet the pollution standard---or
to reduce pollution even further---and firms that might find it
difficult and costly to meet the standard. Firms have no reason to
rethink their production methods in fundamental ways that might reduce
pollution even more and at lower cost.

Third, legislators and EPA analysts write the command-and-control
regulations, and so they are subject to compromises in the political
process. Existing firms often argue (and lobby) that stricter
environmental standards should not apply to them, only to new firms that
wish to start production. Consequently, real-world environmental laws
are full of fine print, loopholes, and exceptions.

Although critics accept the goal of reducing pollution, they question
whether command-and-control regulation is the best way to design policy
tools for accomplishing that goal. A different approach is the use of
market-oriented tools, which we discussed in the next section.
