## 12.5 International Environmental Issues

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain biodiversity
-   Analyze the partnership of high-income and low-income countries in
    efforts to address international externalities

Many countries around the world have become more aware of the benefits
of environmental protection. Yet even if most nations individually took
steps to address their environmental issues, no nation acting alone can
solve certain environmental problems which spill over national borders.
No nation by itself can reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other
gases by enough to solve the problem of global warming---not without the
cooperation of other nations. Another issue is the challenge of
preserving biodiversity, which includes the full spectrum of animal and
plant genetic material. Although a nation can protect biodiversity
within its own borders, no nation acting alone can protect biodiversity
around the world. Global warming and biodiversity are examples of
international externalities.

Bringing the nations of the world together to address environmental
issues requires a difficult set of negotiations between countries with
different income levels and different sets of priorities. If nations
such as China, India, Brazil, Mexico, and others are developing their
economies by burning vast amounts of fossil fuels or by stripping their
forest and wildlife habitats, then the world's high-income countries
acting alone will not be able to reduce greenhouse gases. However,
low-income countries, with some understandable exasperation, point out
that high-income countries do not have much moral standing to lecture
them on the necessities of putting environmental protection ahead of
economic growth. After all, high-income countries have historically been
the primary contributors to greenhouse warming by burning fossil
fuels---and still are today. It is hard to tell people who are living in
a low-income country, where adequate diet, health care, and education
are lacking, that they should sacrifice an improved quality of life for
a cleaner environment.

Can rich and poor countries come together to address global
environmental spillovers? At the initiative of the European Union and
the most vulnerable developing nations, the Durban climate conference in
December 2011 launched negotiations to develop a new international
climate change agreement that covers all countries. The outcome of these
negotiations was the Paris Climate Agreement, passed in 2015. The Paris
Agreement committed participating countries to significant limits on
CO~2~ emissions. To date, 196 entities have signed on, including the two
biggest emitters of greenhouse gases---China and the United States. The
U.S. contribution to the agreement was the Clean Power Plan, which
planned to reduce power plant CO~2~ emissions across the U.S. by 17% to
pre-2005 levels by 2020, and to further reduce emissions by a cumulative
32% by 2030. In early 2017, the Trump Administration announced plans to
back out of the Paris Climate Agreement. Trump opposed the Clean Power
plan, opting instead to shift focus to the use of natural gas. This
represented a significant blow to the success of the Paris Agreement.
However, on his first day in office, President Biden, on behalf of the
United States, rejoined the Paris Climate Agreement.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/EC) to learn more about the
European Commission.

If high-income countries want low-income countries to reduce their
emission of greenhouse gases, then the high-income countries may need to
pay some of the costs. Perhaps some of these payments will happen
through private markets. For example, some tourists from rich countries
will pay handsomely to vacation near the natural treasures of low-income
countries. Perhaps some of the transfer of resources can happen through
making modern pollution-control technology available to poorer
countries.

The practical details of what such an international system might look
like and how it would operate across international borders are
forbiddingly complex. However, it seems highly unlikely that some form
of world government will impose a detailed system of environmental
command-and-control regulation around the world. As a result, a
decentralized and market-oriented approach may be the only practical way
to address international issues such as global warming and biodiversity.
