## Key Concepts and Summary

### 12.1 The Economics of Pollution

Economic production can cause environmental damage. This tradeoff arises
for all countries, whether high-income or low-income, and whether their
economies are market-oriented or command-oriented.

An externality occurs when an exchange between a buyer and seller has an
impact on a third party who is not part of the exchange. An externality,
which is sometimes also called a spillover, can have a negative or a
positive impact on the third party. If those parties imposing a negative
externality on others had to account for the broader social cost of
their behavior, they would have an incentive to reduce the production of
whatever is causing the negative externality. In the case of a positive
externality, the third party obtains benefits from the exchange between
a buyer and a seller, but they are not paying for these benefits. If
this is the case, then markets would tend to under produce output
because suppliers are not aware of the additional demand from others. If
the parties generating benefits to others would somehow receive
compensation for these external benefits, they would have an incentive
to increase production of whatever is causing the positive externality.

### 12.2 Command-and-Control Regulation

Command-and-control regulation sets specific limits for pollution
emissions and/or specific pollution-control technologies that firms must
use. Although such regulations have helped to protect the environment,
they have three shortcomings: they provide no incentive for going beyond
the limits they set; they offer limited flexibility on where and how to
reduce pollution; and they often have politically-motivated loopholes.

### 12.3 Market-Oriented Environmental Tools

Examples of market-oriented environmental policies, also called cap and
trade programs, include pollution charges, marketable permits, and
better-defined property rights. Market-oriented environmental policies
include taxes, markets, and property rights so that those who impose
negative externalities must face the social cost.

### 12.4 The Benefits and Costs of U.S. Environmental Laws

We can make a strong case, taken as a whole, that the benefits of U.S.
environmental regulation have outweighed the costs. As the extent of
environment regulation increases, additional expenditures on
environmental protection will probably have increasing marginal costs
and decreasing marginal benefits. This pattern suggests that the
flexibility and cost savings of market-oriented environmental policies
will become more important.

### 12.5 International Environmental Issues

Certain global environmental issues, such as global warming and
biodiversity, spill over national borders and require addressing with
some form of international agreement.

### 12.6 The Tradeoff between Economic Output and Environmental Protection

Depending on their different income levels and political preferences,
countries are likely to make different choices about allocative
efficiency---that is, the choice between economic output and
environmental protection along the production possibility frontier.
However, all countries should prefer to make a choice that shows
productive efficiency---that is, the choice is somewhere on the
production possibility frontier rather than inside it. Revisit [Choice
in a World of
Scarcity](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/2-introduction-to-choice-in-a-world-of-scarcity)
for more on these terms.
