## 13.1 Investments in Innovation

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Identify the positive externalities of new technology.
-   Explain the difference between private benefits and social benefits
    and give examples of each.
-   Calculate and analyze rates of return

Market competition can provide an incentive for discovering new
technology because a firm can earn higher profits by finding a way to
produce products more cheaply or to create products with characteristics
consumers want. As Gregory Lee, CEO of Samsung said, "Relentless pursuit
of new innovation is the key principle of our business and enables
consumers to discover a world of possibilities with technology." An
innovative firm knows that it will usually have a temporary edge over
its competitors and thus an ability to earn above-normal profits before
competitors can catch up.

In certain cases, however, competition can discourage new technology,
especially when other firms can quickly copy a new idea. Consider a
pharmaceutical firm deciding to develop a new drug. On average, it can
cost \$800 million and take more than a decade to discover a new drug,
perform the necessary safety tests, and bring the drug to market. If the
research and development (R&D) effort fails---and every R&D project has
some chance of failure---then the firm will suffer losses and could even
be driven out of business. If the project succeeds, then the firm's
competitors may figure out ways of adapting and copying the underlying
idea, but without having to pay the costs themselves. As a result, the
innovative company will bear the much higher costs of the R&D and will
enjoy at best only a small, temporary advantage over the competition.

Many inventors over the years have discovered that their inventions
brought them less profit than they might have reasonably expected.

-   Eli Whitney (1765--1825) invented the cotton gin, but then southern
    cotton planters built their own seed-separating devices with a few
    minor changes in Whitney's design. When Whitney sued, he found that
    the courts in southern states would not uphold his patent rights.
-   Thomas Edison (1847--1931) still holds the record for most patents
    granted to an individual. His first invention was an automatic vote
    counter, and despite the social benefits, he could not find a
    government that wanted to buy it.
-   Gordon Gould came up with the idea behind the laser in 1957. He put
    off applying for a patent and, by the time he did apply, other
    scientists had laser inventions of their own. A lengthy legal battle
    resulted, in which Gould spent \$100,000 on lawyers, before he
    eventually received a patent for the laser in 1977. Compared to the
    enormous social benefits of the laser, Gould received relatively
    little financial reward.
-   In 1936, Alan Turing delivered a paper titled, \"On Computable
    Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem,\" in which
    he presented the notion of a universal machine (later called the
    "Universal Turing Machine,\" and then the \"Turing machine\")
    capable of computing anything that is computable. The central
    concept of the modern computer was based on Turing's paper. Today
    scholars widely consider Turing as the father of theoretical
    computer science and artificial intelligence; however, the UK
    government prosecuted Turing in 1952 for engaging in same-sex sexual
    acts and gave him the choice of chemical castration or prison.
    Turing chose castration and died in 1954 from cyanide poisoning.

A variety of studies by economists have found that the original inventor
receives one-third to one-half of the total economic benefits from
innovations, while other businesses and new product users receive the
rest.

### The Positive Externalities of New Technology

Will private firms in a market economy underinvest in research and
technology? If a firm builds a factory or buys a piece of equipment, the
firm receives all the economic benefits that result from the
investments. However, when a firm invests in new technology, the private
benefits, or profits, that the firm receives are only a portion of the
overall social benefits. The social benefits of an innovation account
for the value of all the positive externalities of the new idea or
product, whether enjoyed by other companies or society as a whole, as
well as the private benefits the firm that developed the new technology
receives. As you learned in [Environmental Protection and Negative
Externalities](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/12-introduction-to-environmental-protection-and-negative-externalities),
positive externalities are beneficial spillovers to a third party, or
parties.

Consider the example of the Big Drug Company, which is planning its R&D
budget for the next year. Economists and scientists working for Big Drug
have compiled a list of potential research and development projects and
estimated rates of return. (The rate of return is the estimated payoff
from the project.) [Figure 13.2](#CNX_Econ_C13_002) shows how the
calculations work. The downward-sloping D~Private~ curve represents the
firm's demand for financial capital and reflects the company's
willingness to borrow to finance research and development projects at
various interest rates. Suppose that this firm's investment in research
and development creates a spillover benefit to other firms and
households. After all, new innovations often spark other creative
endeavors that society also values. If we add the spillover benefits
society enjoys to the firm's private demand for financial capital, we
can draw D~Social~ that lies above D~Private~.

If there were a way for the firm to fully monopolize those social
benefits by somehow making them unavailable to the rest of us, the
firm's private demand curve would be the same as society's demand curve.
According to [Figure 13.2](#CNX_Econ_C13_002) and [Table
13.1](#ch13mod01_tab01), if the going rate of interest on borrowing is
8%, and the company can receive the private benefits of innovation only,
then the company would finance \$30 million. Society, at the same rate
of 8%, would find it optimal to have \$52 million of borrowing. Unless
there is a way for the company to fully enjoy the total benefits, then
it will borrow less than the socially optimal level of \$52 million.

![](media/13-1-investments-in-innovation_rId30.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.265in"}

Figure 13.2 Positive Externalities and Technology Big Drug faces a cost
of borrowing of 8%. If the firm receives only the private benefits of
investing in R&D, then we show its demand curve for financial capital by
D~Private~, and the equilibrium will occur at \$30 million. Because
there are spillover benefits, society would find it optimal to have \$52
million of investment. If the firm could keep the social benefits of its
investment for itself, its demand curve for financial capital would be
D~Social~ and it would be willing to borrow \$52 million.

Table 13.1 Return and Demand for Capital

Big Drug's original demand for financial capital (D~Private~) is based
on the profits the firm receives. However, other pharmaceutical firms
and health care companies may learn new lessons about how to treat
certain medical conditions and are then able to create their own
competing products. The social benefit of the drug takes into account
the value of all the drug\'s positive externalities. If Big Drug were
able to gain this social return instead of other companies, its demand
for financial capital would shift to the demand curve D~Social~, and it
would be willing to borrow and invest \$52 million. However, if Big Drug
is receiving only 50 cents of each dollar of social benefits, the firm
will not spend as much on creating new products. The amount it would be
willing to spend would fall somewhere in between D~Private~ and
D~Social~.

### Why Invest in Human Capital?

The investment in anything, whether it is the construction of a new
power plant or research in a new cancer treatment, usually requires a
certain upfront cost with an uncertain future benefit. The investment in
education, or human capital, is no different. Over the span of many
years, a student and her family invest significant amounts of time and
money into that student's education. The idea is that higher levels of
educational attainment will eventually serve to increase the student's
future productivity and subsequent ability to earn. Once the student
crunches the numbers, does this investment pay off for her?

Almost universally, economists have found that the answer to this
question is a clear "Yes." For example, several studies of the return to
education in the United States estimate that the rate of return to a
college education is approximately 10-15%. Data in [Table
13.2](#ch13mod01_tab02), from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics'
*Usual Weekly Earnings of Wage and Salary Workers, Fourth Quarter 2021,*
demonstrate that median weekly earnings are higher for workers who have
completed more education. While these rates of return will beat
equivalent investments in Treasury bonds or savings accounts, the
estimated returns to education go primarily to the individual worker, so
these returns are private rates of return to education.

Table 13.2 Usual Weekly Earnings of Wage and Salary Workers, Fourth
Quarter 2021 (Source: https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/wkyeng.pdf)

What does society gain from investing in the education of another
student? After all, if the government is spending taxpayer dollars to
subsidize public education, society should expect some kind of return on
that spending. Economists like George Psacharopoulos have found that,
across a variety of nations, the social rate of return on schooling is
also positive. After all, positive externalities exist from investment
in education. While not always easy to measure, according to Walter
McMahon, the positive externalities to education typically include
better health outcomes for the population, lower levels of crime, a
cleaner environment and a more stable, democratic government. For these
reasons, many nations have chosen to use taxpayer dollars to subsidize
primary, secondary, and higher education. Education clearly benefits the
person who receives it, but a society where most people have a good
level of education provides positive externalities for all.

### Other Examples of Positive Externalities

Although technology may be the most prominent example of a positive
externality, it is not the only one. For example, vaccinations against
disease are not only a protection for the individual, but they have the
positive spillover of protecting others who may become infected. When a
number of homes in a neighborhood are modernized, updated, and restored,
not only does it increase the homes\' value, but other property values
in the neighborhood may increase as well.

The appropriate public policy response to a positive externality, like a
new technology, is to help the party creating the positive externality
receive a greater share of the social benefits. In the case of vaccines,
like flu shots, an effective policy might be to provide a subsidy to
those who choose to get vaccinated.

[Figure 13.3](#CNX_Econ_C13_004) shows the market for flu shots. The
market demand curve D~Market~ for flu shots reflects only the marginal
private benefits (MPB) that the vaccinated individuals receive from the
shots. Assuming that there are no spillover costs in the production of
flu shots, the market supply curve is given by the marginal private cost
(MPC) of producing the vaccinations.

The equilibrium quantity of flu shots produced in the market, where MPB
is equal to MPC, is Q~Market~ and the price of flu shots is P~Market~.
However, spillover benefits exist in this market because others, those
who chose not to purchase a flu shot, receive a positive externality in
the form of a reduced chance of contracting the flu. When we add the
spillover benefits to the marginal private benefit of flu shots, the
marginal social benefit (MSB) of flu shots is given by D~Social~.
Because the MSB is greater than MPB, we see that the socially optimal
level of flu shots is greater than the market quantity (Q~Social~
exceeds Q~Market~) and the corresponding price of flu shots, if the
market were to produce Q~Social~, would be at P~Social~. Unfortunately,
the marketplace does not recognize the positive externality and flu
shots will go under-produced and under-consumed.

How can government try to move the market level of output closer to the
socially desirable level of output? One policy would be to provide a
subsidy, like a voucher, to any citizen who wishes to get vaccinated.
This voucher would act as "income" that one could use to purchase only a
flu shot and, if the voucher were exactly equal to the per-unit
spillover benefits, would increase market equilibrium to a quantity of
Q~Social~ and a price of P~Social~ where MSB equals MSC (which equals
MPC given the assumption that there are no spillover costs in producing
the vaccine). Suppliers of the flu shots would receive payment of
P~Social~ per vaccination, while consumers of flu shots would redeem the
voucher and only pay a price of P~Subsidy~. When the government uses a
subsidy in this way, it produces the socially optimal quantity of
vaccinations.

![](media/13-1-investments-in-innovation_rId42.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.89in"}

Figure 13.3 The Market for Flu Shots with Spillover Benefits (A Positive
Externality) The market demand curve does not reflect the positive
externality of flu vaccinations, so only Q~Market~ will be exchanged.
This outcome is inefficient because the marginal social benefit exceeds
the marginal social cost. If the government provides a subsidy to
consumers of flu shots, equal to the marginal social benefit minus the
marginal private benefit, the level of vaccinations can increase to the
socially optimal quantity of Q~Social~.

#### Societal Change as an Innovation Outcome

Economist Carlota Perez draws on the lessons of past innovations to
understand the current state of our economy. She demonstrates that prior
technological turning points, such as the proliferation of railroads and
the emergence of mass production, created initial periods of employment
and wealth shifting but eventually led to greater well-being and
economic growth. After difficult transition periods and sometimes
economic meltdowns during the "installment" phase of widespread new
technologies, many economies and the people within them have benefited
from prolonged periods of economic and lifestyle improvement, including
lower unemployment and better quality of life.

Most prior innovation periods, such as the Industrial Revolution, had
one significant downside: negative impacts on the environment, such as
pollution and habitat destruction. Perez notes that our current
revolution---in information and communications technology (ICT)---has
the potential for significant positive externalities related to the
environment. ICT is shifting many areas of society (and therefore
industry) to digital experiences and services that do not require fossil
fuels or similar natural resources. Vehicle sharing, product
rental-reuse networks, and new manufacturing methods offer the promise
of far less consumable consumption. And even though the appearance of
delivery trucks and shipping boxes gives the impression of environmental
damage, most studies indicate that online shopping is better for the
environment than individuals shopping in person. (This is partly
attributed to greater efficiency in a few trucks driving to a
neighborhood rather than everyone in the neighborhood driving to several
stores.) Consumers and governments can spur on those environmental
benefits by choosing or partnering with companies that focus on
furthering their environmental impact, such as by using solar power to
fuel their computer servers or by using electrically powered delivery
trucks.

Like other innovations, ICT has created some employment and economic
opportunities while it has reduced others. Increased globalization and
efficiencies have shuttered businesses and reduced wages in some areas.
Perez's research indicates that those types of employment shifts can be
managed through proper regulation and investment (especially in human
capital), particularly as firms in the relevant industries become mature
and profitable. The prospects aren't simple: ICT has created megafirms
like Amazon and Apple, which despite pleasing their consumers can wield
significant power over governments and employees. But on the
environmental and societal front at least, ICT has offered a wealth of
opportunities and externalities.
