## 15.1 Drawing the Poverty Line

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain economic inequality and how the poverty line is determined
-   Analyze the U.S. poverty rate over time, noting its prevalence among
    different groups of citizens

Comparisons of high and low incomes raise two different issues: economic
inequality and poverty. Poverty is measured by the number of people who
fall below a certain level of income---called the poverty line---that
defines the income one needs for a basic standard of living. Income
inequality compares the share of the total income (or wealth) in society
that different groups receive. For example, one of numerous ways to look
at income inequality is to compare the share of income that the top 10%
receive to the share of income that the bottom 10% receive.

In the United States, the official definition of the poverty line traces
back to a single person: Mollie Orshansky. In 1963, Orshansky, who was
working for the Social Security Administration, published an article
called "Children of the Poor" in a highly useful and dry-as-dust
publication called the *Social Security Bulletin*. Orshansky's idea was
to define a poverty line based on the cost of a healthy diet.

Her previous job had been at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, where
she had worked in an agency called the Bureau of Home Economics and
Human Nutrition. One task of this bureau had been to calculate how much
it would cost to feed a nutritionally adequate diet to a family.
Orshansky found that the average family spent one-third of its income on
food. She then proposed that the poverty line be the amount one requires
to buy a nutritionally adequate diet, given the size of the family,
multiplied by three.

The current U.S. poverty line is essentially the same as the Orshansky
poverty line, although the government adjusts the dollar amounts to
represent the same buying power over time. The U.S. poverty line in 2021
ranged from \$12,880 for a single individual to \$26,500 for a household
of four people.

[Figure 15.2](#CNX_Econ_C14_001) shows the U.S. poverty rate over time;
that is, the percentage of the population below the poverty line in any
given year. The poverty rate declined through the 1960s, rose in the
early 1980s and early 1990s, but seems to have been slightly lower since
the mid-1990s. However, in no year in the last six decades has the
poverty rate been less than 10.5% of the U.S. population---that is, at
best almost one American in nine is below the poverty line. In recent
years, the poverty rate peaked at 15.1% in 2010, before dropping to
10.5% in 2019. [Table 15.1](#ch14mod01_tab01) compares poverty rates for
different groups in 2011. As you will see when we delve further into
these numbers, poverty rates are relatively low for White people, for
the elderly, for the well-educated, and for male-headed households.
Poverty rates for females, Hispanic people, and African Americans are
much higher than for White people. While Hispanic people and African
Americans have a higher percentage of individuals living in poverty than
others, most people in the United States living below the poverty line
are White people.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/povertyprogram) for more
information on U.S. poverty.

![](media/15-1-drawing-the-poverty-line_rId30.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.71in"}

Figure 15.2 The U.S. Poverty Rate since 1960 The poverty rate fell
dramatically during the 1960s, rose in the early 1980s and early 1990s,
and, after declining in the 1990s through mid-2000s, rose to 15.1% in
2020, which is close to the 1960 levels. Between 2010 and 2019, the
poverty rate declined to 10.5%, before rising to 11.4% in 2020 due to
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. (Source: U.S. Census Bureau)

Table 15.1 Poverty Rates by Group, 2020

The concept of a poverty line raises many tricky questions. In a vast
country like the United States, should there be a national poverty line?
After all, according to the Federal Register, the median household
income for a family of four was \$109,113 in New Jersey and \$59,701 in
Mississippi in 2017, and prices of some basic goods like housing are
quite different between states. The poverty line is based on cash
income, which means it does not account for government programs that
provide non-cash assistance such as Medicaid (health care for low-income
individuals and families) and food aid. Also, low-income families can
qualify for federal housing assistance. (We will discuss these and other
government aid programs in detail later in this chapter.)

Should the government adjust the poverty line to account for the value
of such programs? Many economists and policymakers wonder whether we
should rethink the concept of what poverty means in the twenty-first
century. The following Clear It Up feature explains the poverty lines
set by the World Bank for low-income countries around the world.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### How do economists measure poverty in low-income countries? {#how-do-economists-measure-poverty-in-low-income-countries .Heading4Grey}

The World Bank sets two poverty lines for low-income countries around
the world. One poverty line is set at an income of \$1.90/day per
person. The other is at \$3.20/day. By comparison, the U.S. 2015 poverty
line of \$20,090 annually for a family of three works out to \$18.35 per
person per day.

Clearly, many people around the world are far poorer than Americans, as
[Table 15.2](#ch14mod01_tab02) shows. China and India both have more
than a billion people; Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa;
and Egypt is the most populous country in the Middle East. In all four
of those countries, in the mid-2000s, a substantial share of the
population subsisted on less than \$2/day. About half the world lives on
less than \$2.50 a day, and 80 percent of the world lives on less than
\$10 per day. (Of course, the cost of food, clothing, and shelter in
those countries can be very different from those costs in the United
States, so the \$2 and \$2.50 figures may mean greater purchasing power
than they would in the United States.)

Table 15.2 Poverty Lines for Low-Income Countries, mid-2000s (Source:
https://datatopics.worldbank.org/world-development-indicators/themes/poverty-and-inequality.html)

Any poverty line will be somewhat arbitrary, and it is useful to have a
poverty line whose basic definition does not change much over time. If
Congress voted every few years to redefine poverty, then it would be
difficult to compare rates over time. After all, would a lower poverty
rate change the definition, or is it the case that people were actually
better off? Government statisticians at the U.S. Census Bureau have
ongoing research programs to address questions like these.
