## Critical Thinking Questions

30\.

What goods and services would you include in an estimate of the basic
necessities for a family of four?

31\.

If a family of three earned \$20,000, would they be able to make ends
meet given the official poverty threshold?

32\.

[Exercise
15.2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-self-check-questions#ch14mod02_sques01)
and [Exercise
15.3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-self-check-questions#ch14mod02_sques02)
asked you to describe the labor-leisure tradeoff for Jonathon. Since, in
the first example, there is no monetary incentive for Jonathon to work,
explain why he may choose to work anyway. Explain what the opportunity
costs of working and not working might be for Jonathon in each example.
Using your tables and graphs from [Exercise
15.2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-self-check-questions#ch14mod02_sques01)
and [Exercise
15.3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-self-check-questions#ch14mod02_sques02),
analyze how the government welfare system affects Jonathan's incentive
to work.

33\.

Explain how you would create a government program that would give an
incentive for labor to increase hours and keep labor from falling into
the poverty trap.

34\.

Many critics of government programs to help low-income individuals argue
that these programs create a poverty trap. Explain how programs such as
TANF, EITC, SNAP, and Medicaid will affect low-income individuals and
whether or not you think these programs will benefit families and
children.

35\.

Think about the business cycle: during a recession, unemployment
increases; it decreases in an expansionary phase. Explain what happens
to TANF, SNAP, and Medicaid programs at each phase of the business cycle
(recession, trough, expansion, and peak).

36\.

Explain how a country may experience greater equality in the
distribution of income, yet still experience high rates of poverty.
*Hint*: Look at the [Clear It
Up](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-1-drawing-the-poverty-line#ch14mod01_clearup)
\"How do governments measure poverty in low-income countries?\" and
compare to [Table
15.5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-4-income-inequality-measurement-and-causes#ch14mod04_tab07).

37\.

The demand for skilled workers in the United States has been increasing.
To increase the supply of skilled workers, many argue that immigration
reform to allow more skilled labor into the United States is needed.
Explain whether you agree or disagree.

38\.

Explain a situation using the supply and demand for skilled labor in
which the increased number of college graduates leads to depressed
wages. Given the rising cost of going to college, explain why a college
education will or will not increase income inequality.

39\.

What do you think is more important to focus on when considering
inequality: income inequality or wealth inequality?

40\.

To reduce income inequality, should the marginal tax rates on the top 1%
be increased?

41\.

Redistribution of income occurs through the federal income tax and
government antipoverty programs. Explain whether or not this level of
redistribution is appropriate and whether more redistribution should
occur.

42\.

How does a society or a country make the decision about the tradeoff
between equality and economic output? *Hint*: Think about the political
system.

43\.

Explain what the long- and short-term consequences are of not promoting
equality or working to reduce poverty.
