## Self-Check Questions

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod01_sques01-solution).

Describe how each of these changes is likely to affect poverty and
inequality:

a.  Incomes rise for low-income and high-income workers, but rise more
    for the high-income earners.
b.  Incomes fall for low-income and high-income workers, but fall more
    for high-income earners.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod02_sques01-solution).

Jonathon is a single father with one child. He can work as a server for
\$6 per hour for up to 1,500 hours per year. He is eligible for welfare,
and so if he does not earn any income, he will receive a total of
\$10,000 per year. He can work and still receive government benefits,
but for every \$1 of income, his welfare stipend is \$1 less. Create a
table similar to [Table
15.4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/15-2-the-poverty-trap#ch14mod02_tab04)
that shows Jonathan's options. Use four columns, the first showing
number of hours to work, the second showing his earnings from work, the
third showing the government benefits he will receive, and the fourth
column showing his total income (earnings + government support). Sketch
a labor-leisure diagram of Jonathan's opportunity set with and without
government support.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod02_sques02-solution).

Imagine that the government reworks the welfare policy that was
affecting Jonathan in question 1, so that for each dollar someone like
Jonathan earns at work, his government benefits diminish by only 30
cents. Reconstruct the table from question 1 to account for this change
in policy. Draw Jonathan's labor-leisure opportunity sets, both for
before this welfare program is enacted and after it is enacted.

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod03_sques01-solution).

We have discovered that the welfare system discourages recipients from
working because the more income they earn, the less welfare benefits
they receive. How does the earned income tax credit attempt to loosen
the poverty trap?

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod03_sques02-solution).

How does the TANF attempt to loosen the poverty trap?

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod04_sques01-solution).

A group of 10 people have the following annual incomes: \$24,000,
\$18,000, \$50,000, \$100,000, \$12,000, \$36,000, \$80,000, \$10,000,
\$24,000, \$16,000. Calculate the share of total income that each
quintile receives from this income distribution. Do the top and bottom
quintiles in this distribution have a greater or larger share of total
income than the top and bottom quintiles of the U.S. income
distribution?

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod04_sques02-solution).

[Table 15.9](#ch14mod04_tab11) shows the share of income going to each
quintile of the income distribution for the United Kingdom in 1979 and
1991. Use this data to calculate what the points on a Lorenz curve would
be, and sketch the Lorenz curve. How did inequality in the United
Kingdom shift over this time period? How can you see the patterns in the
quintiles in the Lorenz curves?

Table 15.9 Income Distribution in the United Kingdom, 1979 and 1991

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod04_sques03-solution).

Using two demand and supply diagrams, one for the low-wage labor market
and one for the high-wage labor market, explain how information
technology can increase income inequality if it is a complement to
high-income workers like salespeople and managers, but a substitute for
low-income workers like file clerks and telephone receptionists.

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod04_sques04-solution).

Using two demand and supply diagrams, one for the low-wage labor market
and one for the high-wage labor market, explain how a program that
increased educational levels for a substantial number of low-skill
workers could reduce income inequality.

[10](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod05_sques01-solution).

Here is one hypothesis: A well-funded social safety net can increase
economic equality but will reduce economic output. Explain why this
might be so, and sketch a production possibility curve that shows this
tradeoff.

[11](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod05_sques02-solution).

Here is a second hypothesis: A well-funded social safety net may lead to
less regulation of the market economy. Explain why this might be so, and
sketch a production possibility curve that shows this tradeoff.

[12](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod05_sques03-solution).

Which set of policies is more likely to cause a tradeoff between
economic output and equality: policies of redistribution or policies
aimed at the ladder of opportunity? Explain how the production
possibility frontier tradeoff between economic equality and output might
look in each case.

[13](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-15#ch14mod05_sques04-solution).

Why is there reluctance on the part of some in the United States to
redistribute income so that greater equality can be achieved?
