## 16.2 Insurance and Imperfect Information

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain how insurance works
-   Identify and evaluate various forms of government and social
    insurance
-   Discuss the problems caused by moral hazard and adverse selection
-   Analyze the impact of government regulation of insurance

Insurance is a method that households and firms use to prevent any
single event from having a significant detrimental financial effect.
Generally, households or firms with insurance make regular payments,
called premiums. The insurance company prices these premiums based on
the probability of certain events occurring among a pool of people.
Members of the group who then suffer a specified bad experience receive
payments from this pool of money.

Many people have several kinds of insurance: health insurance that pays
when they receive medical care; car insurance that pays if their car is
in an automobile accident; house or renter's insurance that pays for
stolen possessions or items damaged by fire; and life insurance, which
pays for the family if the insured individual dies. [Table
16.1](#Table_16_01) lists a set of insurance markets.

Table 16.1 Some Insurance Markets

All insurance involves imperfect information in both an obvious way and
in a deeper way. At an obvious level, we cannot predict future events
with certainty. For example, we cannot know with certainty who will have
a car accident, become ill, die, or have his home robbed in the next
year. Imperfect information also applies to estimating the risk that
something will happen to any individual. It is difficult for an
insurance company to estimate the risk that, say, a particular
20-year-old male driver from New York City will have an accident,
because even within that group, some drivers will drive more safely than
others. Thus, adverse events occur out of a combination of people's
characteristics and choices that make the risks higher or lower and then
the good or bad luck of what actually happens.

### How Insurance Works

A simplified example of automobile insurance might work this way.
Suppose we divide a group of 100 drivers into three groups. In a given
year, 60 of those people have only a few door dings or chipped paint,
which costs \$100 each. Another 30 of the drivers have medium-sized
accidents that cost an average of \$1,000 in damages, and 10 of the
drivers have large accidents that cost \$15,000 in damages. For the
moment, let's imagine that at the beginning of any year, there is no way
of identifying the drivers who are low-risk, medium-risk, or high-risk.
The total damage incurred by car accidents in this group of 100 drivers
will be \$186,000, that is:

![multiline equation row 1 Total damage equals left parenthesis 60 times
dollar sign 100 right parenthesis plus left parenthesis 30 times dollar
sign 1,000 right parenthesis plus left parenthesis 10 times dollar sign
15,000 right parenthesis row 2 Blank equals dollar sign 6,000 plus
dollar sign 30,000 plus dollar sign 150,000 row 3 Blank equals dollar
sign 186,000](media/16-2-insurance-and-imperfect-information_rId24.png){width="4.375in"
height="0.6145833333333334in"}

If each of the 100 drivers pays a \$1,860 premium each year, the
insurance company will collect the \$186,000 that is needed to cover the
costs of the accidents that occur.

Since insurance companies have such a large number of clients, they are
able to negotiate with health care and other service providers for lower
rates than the individual would be able to get, thus increasing the
benefit to consumers of becoming insured and saving the insurance
company itself money when it pays out claims.

Insurance companies receive income, as [Figure 16.2](#CNX_Econ_C16_001)
shows, from insurance premiums and investment income. The companies
derive income from investing the funds that insurance companies received
in the past but did not pay out as insurance claims in prior years. The
insurance company receives a rate of return from investing these funds
or reserves. The companies typically invest in fairly safe, liquid (easy
to convert into cash) investments, as the insurance companies need to be
able to readily access these funds when a major disaster strikes.

![](media/16-2-insurance-and-imperfect-information_rId26.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="1.0449989063867016in"}

Figure 16.2 An Insurance Company: What Comes In, What Goes Out Money
flows into an insurance company through premiums and investments and out
through the payment of claims and operating expenses.

### Government and Social Insurance

Federal and state governments run a number of insurance programs. Some
of the programs look much like private insurance, in the sense that the
members of a group make steady payments into a fund, and those in the
group who suffer an adverse experience receive payments. Other programs
protect against risk, but without an explicit fund set up. Following are
some examples.

-   Unemployment insurance: Employers in every state pay a small amount
    for unemployment insurance, which goes into a fund to pay benefits
    to workers who lose their jobs and do not find new jobs, for a
    period of time, usually up to six months.
-   Pension insurance: Employers that offer pensions to their retired
    employees are required by law to pay a small fraction of what they
    are setting aside for pensions to the Pension Benefit Guarantee
    Corporation, which pays at least some pension benefits to workers if
    a company goes bankrupt and cannot pay the pensions it has promised.
-   Deposit insurance: Banks are required by law to pay a small fraction
    of their deposits to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
    which goes into a fund that pays depositors the value of their bank
    deposits up to \$250,000 (the amount was raised from \$100,000 to
    \$250,000 in 2008) if the bank should go bankrupt.
-   Workman's compensation insurance: Employers are required by law to
    pay a small percentage of the salaries that they pay into funds,
    typically run at the state level, that pay benefits to workers who
    suffer an injury on the job.
-   Retirement insurance: All workers pay a percentage of their income
    into Social Security and into Medicare, which then provides income
    and health care benefits to the elderly. Social Security and
    Medicare are not literally "insurance" in the sense that those
    currently contributing to the fund are not eligible for benefits.
    They function like insurance, however, in the sense that individuals
    make regular payments into the programs today in exchange for
    benefits they will receive in the case of a later event---either
    becoming old or becoming sick when old. A name for such programs is
    "social insurance."

The major additional costs to insurance companies, other than the
payment of claims, are the costs of running a business: the
administrative costs of hiring workers, administering accounts, and
processing insurance claims. For most insurance companies, the insurance
premiums coming in and the claims payments going out are much larger
than the amounts earned by investing money or the administrative costs.

Thus, while factors like investment income earned on reserves,
administrative costs, and groups with different risks complicate the
overall picture, a fundamental law of insurance must hold true: The
average person's payments into insurance over time must cover 1) the
average person's claims, 2) the costs of running the company, and 3)
leave room for the firm's profits.

### Risk Groups and Actuarial Fairness

Not all of those who purchase insurance face the same risks. Some people
may be more likely, because of genetics or personal habits, to fall sick
with certain diseases. Some people may live in an area where car theft
or home robbery is more likely than in other areas. Some drivers are
safer than others. A risk group can be defined as a group that shares
roughly the same risks of an adverse event occurring.

Insurance companies often classify people into risk groups, and charge
lower premiums to those with lower risks. If people are not separated
into risk groups, then those with low risk must pay for those with high
risks. In the simple example of how car insurance works, 60 drivers had
very low damage of \$100 each, 30 drivers had medium-sized accidents
that cost \$1,000 each, and 10 of the drivers had large accidents that
cost \$15,000. If all 100 of these drivers pay the same \$1,860, then
those with low damages are in effect paying for those with high damages.

If it is possible to classify drivers according to risk group, then the
insurance company can charge each group according to its expected
losses. For example, the insurance company might charge the 60 drivers
who seem safest of all \$100 apiece, which is the average value of the
damages they cause. Then the intermediate group could pay \$1,000 apiece
and the high-cost group \$15,000 each. When the level of insurance
premiums that someone pays is equal to the amount that an average person
in that risk group would collect in insurance payments, the level of
insurance is said to be "actuarially fair."

Classifying people into risk groups can be controversial. For example,
if someone had a major automobile accident last year, should the
insurance company classify that person as a high-risk driver who is
likely to have similar accidents in the future, or as a low-risk driver
who was just extremely unlucky? The driver is likely to claim to be
low-risk, and thus someone who should be in a risk group with those who
pay low insurance premiums in the future. The insurance company is
likely to believe that, on average, having a major accident is a signal
of being a high-risk driver, and thus try to charge this driver higher
insurance premiums. The next two sections discuss the two major problems
of imperfect information in insurance markets---called moral hazard and
adverse selection. Both problems arise from attempts to categorize those
purchasing insurance into risk groups.

### The Moral Hazard Problem

Moral hazard refers to the case when people engage in riskier behavior
with insurance than they would if they did not have insurance. For
example, if you have health insurance that covers the cost of visiting
the doctor, you may be less likely to take precautions against catching
an illness that might require a doctor's visit. If you have car
insurance, you will worry less about driving or parking your car in ways
that make it more likely to get dented. In another example, a business
without insurance might install absolute top-level security and fire
sprinkler systems to guard against theft and fire. If it is insured,
that same business might only install a minimum level of security and
fire sprinkler systems.

We cannot eliminate moral hazard, but insurance companies have some ways
of reducing its effect. Investigations to prevent insurance fraud are
one way of reducing the extreme cases of moral hazard. Insurance
companies can also monitor certain kinds of behavior. To return to the
example from above, they might offer a business a lower rate on property
insurance if the business installs a top-level security and fire
sprinkler system and has those systems inspected once a year.

Another method to reduce moral hazard is to require the injured party to
pay a share of the costs. For example, insurance policies often have
deductibles, which is an amount that the insurance policyholder must pay
out of their own pocket before the insurance coverage starts paying. For
example, auto insurance might pay for all losses greater than \$500.
Health insurance policies often have a copayment, in which the
policyholder must pay a small amount. For example, a person might have
to pay \$20 for each doctor visit, and the insurance company would cover
the rest. Another method of cost sharing is coinsurance, which means
that the insurance company covers a certain percentage of the cost. For
example, insurance might pay for 80% of the costs of repairing a home
after a fire, but the homeowner would pay the other 20%.

All of these forms of cost sharing discourage moral hazard, because
people know that they will have to pay something out of their own pocket
when they make an insurance claim. The effect can be powerful. One
prominent study found that when people face moderate deductibles and
copayments for their health insurance, they consume about one-third less
in medical care than people who have complete insurance and do not pay
anything out of pocket, presumably because deductibles and copayments
reduce the level of moral hazard. However, those who consumed less
health care did not seem to have any difference in health status.

A final way of reducing moral hazard, which is especially applicable to
health care, is to focus on healthcare incentives of providers rather
than consumers. Traditionally, most health care in the United States has
been provided on a fee-for-service basis, which means that medical care
providers are paid for the services they provide and are paid more if
they provide additional services. However, in the last decade or so, the
structure of healthcare provision has shifted to an emphasis on health
maintenance organizations (HMOs). A health maintenance organization
(HMO) provides healthcare that receives a fixed amount per person
enrolled in the plan---regardless of how many services are provided. In
this case, a patient with insurance has an incentive to demand more
care, but the healthcare provider, which is receiving only a fixed
payment, has an incentive to reduce the moral hazard problem by limiting
the quantity of care provided---as long as it will not lead to worse
health problems and higher costs later. Today, many doctors are paid
with some combination of managed care and fee-for-service; that is, a
flat amount per patient, but with additional payments for the treatment
of certain health conditions.

Imperfect information is the cause of the moral hazard problem. If an
insurance company had perfect information on risk, it could simply raise
its premiums every time an insured party engages in riskier behavior.
However, an insurance company cannot monitor all the risks that people
take all the time and so, even with various checks and cost sharing,
moral hazard will remain a problem.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/healtheconomics) to read
about the relationship between health care and behavioral economics.

### The Adverse Selection Problem

Adverse selection refers to the problem in which insurance buyers have
more information about whether they are high-risk or low-risk than the
insurance company does. This creates an asymmetric information problem
for the insurance company because buyers who are high-risk tend to want
to buy more insurance, without letting the insurance company know about
their higher risk. For example, someone purchasing health insurance or
life insurance probably knows more about their family's health history
than an insurer can reasonably find out even with a costly
investigation. Someone purchasing car insurance may know that they are a
high-risk driver who has not yet had a major accident---but it is hard
for the insurance company to collect information about how people
actually drive.

To understand how adverse selection can strangle an insurance market,
recall the situation of 100 drivers who are buying automobile insurance,
where 60 drivers had very low damages of \$100 each, 30 drivers had
medium-sized accidents that cost \$1,000 each, and 10 of the drivers had
large accidents that cost \$15,000. That would equal \$186,000 in total
payouts by the insurance company. Imagine that, while the insurance
company knows the overall size of the losses, it cannot identify the
high-risk, medium-risk, and low-risk drivers. However, the drivers
themselves know their risk groups. Since there is asymmetric information
between the insurance company and the drivers, the insurance company
would likely set the price of insurance at \$1,860 per year, to cover
the average loss (not including the cost of overhead and profit). The
result is that those with low risks of only \$100 will likely decide not
to buy insurance; after all, it makes no sense for them to pay \$1,860
per year when they are likely only to experience losses of \$100. Those
with medium risks of a \$1,000 accident will not buy insurance either.
Therefore, the insurance company ends up only selling insurance for
\$1,860 to high-risk drivers who will average \$15,000 in claims apiece,
and as a consequence, the insurance company ends up losing considerable
money. If the insurance company tries to raise its premiums to cover the
losses of those with high risks, then those with low or medium risks
will be even more discouraged from buying insurance.

Rather than face such a situation of adverse selection, the insurance
company may decide not to sell insurance in this market at all. If
potential buyers are to receive insurance, then one of two things must
happen. First, the insurance company might find some way of separating
insurance buyers into risk groups with some degree of accuracy and
charging them accordingly, which in practice often means that the
insurance company tries not to sell insurance to those who may pose high
risks. Another scenario is that those with low risks must buy insurance,
even if they have to pay more than the actuarially fair amount for their
risk group. The notion that people can be required to purchase insurance
raises the issue of government laws and regulations that influence the
insurance industry.

### U.S. Health Care in an International Context

The United States is the only high-income country in the world where
private firms pay and provide for most health insurance. Greater
government involvement in the provision of health insurance is one
possible way of addressing moral hazard and adverse selection problems.

The moral hazard problem with health insurance is that when people have
insurance, they will demand higher quantities of health care. In the
United States, private healthcare insurance tends to encourage an
ever-greater demand for healthcare services, which healthcare providers
are happy to fulfill. [Table 16.2](#Table_16_02) shows that on a
per-person basis, U.S. healthcare spending towers above healthcare
spending of other countries. Note that while healthcare expenditures in
the United States are far higher than healthcare expenditures in other
countries, the health outcomes in the United States, as measured by life
expectancy and lower rates of childhood mortality, tend to be lower.
Health outcomes, however, may not be significantly affected by
healthcare expenditures. Many studies have shown that a country's health
is more closely related to diet, exercise, and genetic factors than to
healthcare expenditure. This fact further emphasizes that the United
States is spending very large amounts on medical care with little
obvious health gain.

In the U.S. health insurance market, the main way of solving this
adverse selection problem is that health insurance is often sold through
groups based on place of employment, or, under The Affordable Care Act,
from a state government sponsored health exchange market. From an
insurance company's point of view, selling insurance through an employer
mixes together a group of people---some with high risks of future health
problems and some with lower risks---and thus reduces the insurance
firm's fear of attracting only those who have high risks. However, many
small companies do not provide health insurance to their employees, and
many lower-paying jobs do not include health insurance. Even after we
take into account all U.S. government programs that provide health
insurance for the elderly and people experiencing poverty, approximately
31 million Americans were without health insurance in 2020. While a
government-controlled system can avoid the adverse selection problem
entirely by providing at least basic health insurance for all, another
option is to mandate that all Americans buy health insurance from some
provider by preventing providers from denying individuals based on
preexisting conditions. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
adopted this approach, which we will discuss later on in this chapter.

Table 16.2 A Comparison of Health Care Spending per Person, Life
Expectancy at Birth, and Infant Mortality, 2020 (Source: 2020 OECD study
and World Fact Book)

At its best, the largely private U.S. system of health insurance and
healthcare delivery provides an extraordinarily high quality of care,
along with generating a seemingly endless parade of life-saving
innovations. However, the system also struggles to control its high
costs and to provide basic medical care to all. Compared to the United
States, other countries have lower costs, more equal access, and better
mortality outcomes, but they often struggle to provide rapid access to
health care and to offer the near-miracles of the most up-to-date
medical care. The challenge is a healthcare system that strikes the
right balance between quality, access, and cost.

### Government Regulation of Insurance

The U.S. insurance industry is primarily regulated at the state level.
Since 1871 there has been a National Association of Insurance
Commissioners that brings together these state regulators to exchange
information and strategies. The state insurance regulators typically
attempt to accomplish two things: to keep the price of insurance low and
to ensure that everyone has insurance. These goals, however, can
conflict with each other and also become easily entangled in politics.

If insurance premiums are set at actuarially fair levels, so that people
end up paying an amount that accurately reflects their risk group,
certain people will end up paying considerable amounts. For example, if
health insurance companies were trying to cover people who already have
a chronic disease like AIDS, or who were elderly, they would charge
these groups very high premiums for health insurance, because their
expected health care costs are quite high. Women in the age bracket
18--44 consume, on average, about 65% more in health care spending than
men. Young male drivers have more car accidents than young female
drivers. Thus, actuarially fair insurance would tend to charge young men
much more for car insurance than young women. Because people in
high-risk groups would find themselves charged so heavily for insurance,
they might choose not to buy insurance at all.

State insurance regulators have sometimes reacted by passing rules that
attempt to set low premiums for insurance. Over time, however, the
fundamental law of insurance must hold: the average amount individuals
receive cannot exceed the average amount paid in premiums. When rules
are passed to keep premiums low, insurance companies try to avoid
insuring any high-risk or even medium-risk parties. If a state
legislature passes strict rules requiring insurance companies to sell to
everyone at low prices, the insurance companies always have the option
of withdrawing from doing business in that state. For example, the
insurance regulators in New Jersey are well-known for attempting to keep
auto insurance premiums low, and more than 20 different insurance
companies stopped doing business in the state in the late 1990s and
early 2000s. Similarly, in 2009, State Farm announced that it was
withdrawing from selling property insurance in Florida.

In short, government regulators cannot force companies to charge low
prices and provide high levels of insurance coverage---and thus take
losses---for a sustained period of time. If insurance premiums are set
below the actuarially fair level for a certain group, some other group
will have to make up the difference. There are two other groups who can
make up the difference: taxpayers or other insurance buyers.

In some industries, the U.S. government has decided free markets will
not provide insurance at an affordable price, and so the government pays
for it directly. For example, private health insurance is too expensive
for many people whose incomes are too low. To combat this, the U.S.
government, together with the states, runs the Medicaid program, which
provides health care to those with low incomes. Private health insurance
also does not work well for the elderly, because their average health
care costs can be very high. Thus, the U.S. government started the
Medicare program, which provides health insurance to all those over age
65. Other government-funded health-care programs are aimed at military
veterans, as an added benefit, and children in families with relatively
low incomes.

Another common government intervention in insurance markets is to
require that everyone buy certain kinds of insurance. For example, most
states legally require car owners to buy auto insurance. Likewise, when
a bank loans someone money to buy a home, the person is typically
required to have homeowner's insurance, which protects against fire and
other physical damage (like hailstorms) to the home. A legal requirement
that everyone must buy insurance means that insurance companies do not
need to worry that those with low risks will avoid buying insurance.
Since insurance companies do not need to fear adverse selection, they
can set their prices based on an average for the market, and those with
lower risks will, to some extent, end up subsidizing those with higher
risks. However, even when laws are passed requiring people to purchase
insurance, insurance companies cannot be compelled to sell insurance to
everyone who asks---at least not at low cost. Thus, insurance companies
will still try to avoid selling insurance to those with high risks
whenever possible.

The government cannot pass laws that make the problems of moral hazard
and adverse selection disappear, but the government can make political
decisions that certain groups should have insurance, even though the
private market would not otherwise provide that insurance. Also, the
government can impose the costs of that decision on taxpayers or on
other buyers of insurance.

### The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

In March of 2010, President Obama signed into law the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). The government started to phase in this
highly contentious law over time starting in October of 2013. The goal
of the act is to bring the United States closer to universal coverage.
Some of the key features of the plan include:

-   Individual mandate: All individuals, who do not receive health care
    through their employer or through a government program (for example,
    Medicare), were required to have health insurance or pay a fine. The
    individual mandate\'s goal was to reduce the adverse selection
    problem and keep prices down by requiring all consumers---even the
    healthiest ones---to have health insurance. Without the need to
    guard against adverse selection (whereby only the riskiest consumers
    buy insurance) by raising prices, health insurance companies could
    provide more reasonable plans to their customers. At the beginning
    of 2019, the fine for not having health insurance was eliminated.
-   Each state is required to have health insurance exchanges, or
    utilize the federal exchange, whereby insurance companies compete
    for business. The goal of the exchanges is to improve competition in
    the market for health insurance.
-   Employer mandate: All employers with more than 50 employees must
    offer health insurance to their employees.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) is funded through additional taxes that
include:

-   Increasing the Medicare tax by 0.9 percent and adding a 3.8 percent
    tax on unearned income for high income taxpayers.
-   Charging an annual fee on health insurance providers.
-   Imposing other taxes such as a 2.3% tax on manufacturers and
    importers of certain medical devices.

Many people and politicians, including Donald Trump, have sought to
overturn the bill. Those who oppose the bill believe it violates an
individual's right to choose whether to have insurance or not. In 2012,
a number of states challenged the law on the basis that the individual
mandate provision is unconstitutional. In June 2012, the U.S. Supreme
Court ruled in a 5--4 decision that the individual mandate is actually a
tax, so it is constitutional as the federal government has the right to
tax the populace. At the same time, some of the taxes that were
implemented as part of the ACA have been eliminated.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### What's the Big Deal with Obamacare? {#whats-the-big-deal-with-obamacare .Heading4Grey}

What is it that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) will actually do? To begin
with, we should note that it is a massively complex law, with a large
number of parts, some of which the Obama administration implemented
immediately, and others that the government is supposed to phase in
every year from 2013 through 2020. Three of these parts are coverage for
the uninsured---those without health insurance, coverage for individuals
with preexisting conditions, and the so-called employer and individual
mandates, which require employers to offer and people to purchase health
insurance. Under the Trump administration, several components of the ACA
were repealed or overhauled, while under the Biden administration (and
with the support of a majority of the population) the ACA has continued
as a major element in provision of health care in the United States.

As we noted in the chapter, people face ever-increasing healthcare costs
in the United States. Over the years, the ranks of the uninsured in the
United States have grown as rising prices have pushed employers and
individuals out of the market. Insurance companies have increasingly
used pre-existing medical conditions to determine if someone is high
risk, for whom insurance companies either charge higher prices, or they
choose to deny insurance coverage to these individuals. Whatever the
cause, we noted at the beginning of the chapter that prior to the ACA,
more than 32 million Americans were uninsured. People who are uninsured
tend to use emergency rooms for treatment---the most expensive form of
healthcare, which has contributed significantly to rising costs.

The ACA introduced regulations designed to control increases in
healthcare costs. One example is a cap on the amount healthcare
providers can spend on administrative costs. Another is a requirement
that healthcare providers switch to electronic medical records (EMRs),
which will reduce administrative costs.

The ACA required that states establish health insurance exchanges, or
markets, where people without health insurance, and businesses that do
not provide it for their employees, can shop for different insurance
plans. The purpose of these exchanges was to increase competition in
insurance markets and thus reduce prices of policies.

Finally, the ACA mandated that people with preexisting conditions could
no longer be denied health insurance. The U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services estimates that the those without insurance in the US has
fallen from 20.3% in 2012 to 11.5% in 2016. Accordingly, 20 million
Americans gained coverage under the ACA. According to the Census, as of
2020, the share of the population without health insurance had fallen to
8.6%. So the ACA has resulted in a decline in the percentage of
Americans without health insurance by almost 60%.

What was the cost of this increased coverage and how was it paid? An
insurance policy works by insuring against the possibility of needing
healthcare. If there are high risk individuals in the insurance pool,
the pool must be expanded to include enough low risk individuals to keep
average premiums affordable. To that end, the ACA imposed the individual
mandate, requiring all individuals to purchase insurance (or pay a
penalty) whether they were high risk or not. Many young adults would
choose to skip health insurance since the likelihood of their needing
significant healthcare is small. The individual mandate brought in a
significant amount of money to pay for the ACA. However, despite the
elimination of the penalty for not having insurance, ACA coverage has
continued to increase. In addition, there were three other funding
sources. The ACA took \$716 billion which otherwise would have gone to
Medicare spending. The ACA also increased the Medicare tax that wealthy
Americans paid by an additional 0.9%. Despite these funding sources, the
Congressional Budget Office estimates that the ACA will increase the
federal debt by \$137 billion over the next decade.

The impact of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has been a
rise in Americans with health insurance. However, due to the increased
taxes to pay for the ACA and the increased deficit spending, the ACA
faces continued opposition. The Trump administration vowed to repeal it
on the campaign trail but no alternative bill has made its way before
congress. Only time will tell if the Affordable Care Act will leave a
legacy or will quickly be swept by the wayside, jeopardizing the 20
million newly insured Americans.

At the time of this writing, the final impact of the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act is not clear. Millions of previously uninsured
Americans now have coverage, but the increased taxes to pay for ACA and
increased deficit spending have created significant political
opposition. Whether or not that opposition eventually succeeds in
overturning the ACA remains to be seen.
