![](media/16-introduction-to-information-risk-and-insurance_rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.908333333333333in"}

Figure 16.1 Former President Obama's Health Care Reform The Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), more commonly known as
Obamacare, relates strongly to the topic of this chapter. While
originally a controversial topic, it has gained majority approval at 55%
as of March 2022. (Credit: "Obama at Healthcare rally at UMD" by Daniel
Borman/Flickr Creative Commons, CC BY 2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   The Problem of Imperfect Information and Asymmetric Information
-   Insurance and Imperfect Information

## Introduction to Information, Risk, and Insurance

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### What's the Big Deal with Obamacare? {#whats-the-big-deal-with-obamacare .Heading4Grey}

In August 2009, many members of the U.S. Congress used their summer
recess to return to their home districts and hold town hall-style
meetings to discuss President Obama's proposed changes to the U.S.
healthcare system. This was officially known as the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) or as the Affordable Care Act (ACA), but
was more popularly known as Obamacare. The bill's opponents' claims
ranged from the charge that the changes were unconstitutional and would
add \$750 billion to the deficit, to extreme claims about the inclusion
of things like the implantation of microchips and so-called "death
panels" that decide which critically-ill patients receive care and which
do not.

Why did people react so strongly? After all, the intent of the law is to
make healthcare insurance more affordable, to allow more people to
obtain insurance, and to reduce the costs of healthcare. For each year
from 2000 to 2011, these costs grew at least double the rate of
inflation. In 2014, healthcare spending accounted for around 24% of all
federal government spending. In the United States, we spend more for our
healthcare than any other high-income nation, yet our health outcomes
are worse than comparable high-income countries. In 2015, over 32
million people in the United States, about 12.8% of the non-elderly
adult population, were without insurance. Even today, however, more than
a decade after the Act was signed into law and after the Supreme Court
mostly upheld it, a 2022 Kaiser Foundation poll found that 42% of likely
voters viewed it unfavorably. Why is this?

The debate over the ACA and healthcare reform could take an entire
textbook, but what this chapter will do is introduce the basics of
insurance and the problems insurance companies face. It is these
problems, and how insurance companies respond to them that, in part,
explain the divided opinion about the ACA.

Every purchase is based on a belief about the satisfaction that the good
or service will provide. In turn, these beliefs are based on the
information that the buyer has available. For many products, the
information available to the buyer or the seller is imperfect or
unclear, which can either make buyers regret past purchases or avoid
making future ones.

This chapter discusses how imperfect and asymmetric information affect
markets. The first module of the chapter discusses how asymmetric
information affects markets for goods, labor, and financial capital.
When buyers have less information about the quality of the good (for
example, a gemstone) than sellers do, sellers may be tempted to mislead
buyers. If a buyer cannot have at least some confidence in the quality
of what they are purchasing, then they will be reluctant or unwilling to
purchase the products. Thus, we require mechanisms to bridge this
information gap, so buyers and sellers can engage in a transaction.

The second module of the chapter discusses insurance markets, which also
face similar problems of imperfect information. For example, a car
insurance company would prefer to sell insurance only to those who are
unlikely to have auto accidents---but it is hard for the firm to
identify those perfectly safe drivers. Conversely, car insurance buyers
would like to persuade the auto insurance company that they are safe
drivers and should pay only a low price for coverage. If insurance
markets cannot find ways to grapple with these problems of imperfect
information, then even people who have low or average risks of making
claims may not be able to purchase insurance. The chapter on financial
markets (markets for stocks and bonds) will show that the problems of
imperfect information can be especially poignant. We cannot eliminate
imperfect information, but we can often manage it.
