## 17.3 How to Accumulate Personal Wealth

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the random walk theory
-   Calculate simple and compound interest
-   Evaluate how capital markets transform financial capital

Getting rich may seem straightforward enough. Figure out what companies
are going to grow and earn high profits in the future, or figure out
what companies are going to become popular for everyone else to buy.
Those companies are the ones that will pay high dividends or whose stock
price will climb in the future. Then, buy stock in those companies.
Presto! Multiply your money!

Why is this path to riches not as easy as it sounds? This module first
discusses the problems with picking stocks, and then discusses a more
reliable but undeniably duller method of accumulating personal wealth.

### Why It Is Hard to Get Rich Quick: The Random Walk Theory

The chief problem with attempting to buy stock in companies that will
have higher prices in the future is that many other financial investors
are trying to do the same thing. Thus, in attempting to get rich in the
stock market, it is no help to identify a company that is going to earn
high profits if many other investors have already reached the same
conclusion, because the stock price will already be high, based on the
expected high level of future profits.

The idea that stock prices are based on expectations about the future
has a powerful and unexpected implication. If expectations determine
stock price, then shifts in expectations will determine shifts in the
stock price. Thus, what matters for predicting whether the stock price
of a company will do well is not whether the company will actually earn
profits in the future. Instead, you must find a company that analysts
widely believe at present to have poor prospects, but that will actually
turn out to be a shining star. Brigades of stock market analysts and
individual investors are carrying out such research 24 hours a day.

The fundamental problem with predicting future stock winners is that, by
definition, no one can predict the future news that alters expectations
about profits. Because stock prices will shift in response to
unpredictable future news, these prices will tend to follow what
mathematicians call a "random walk with a trend." The "random walk" part
means that, on any given day, stock prices are just as likely to rise as
to fall. "With a trend" means that over time, the upward steps tend to
be larger than the downward steps, so stocks do gradually climb.

If stocks follow a random walk, then not even financial professionals
will be able to choose those that will beat the average consistently.
While some investment advisers are better than average in any given
year, and some even succeed for a number of years in a row, the majority
of financial investors do not outguess the market. If we look back over
time, it is typically true that half or two-thirds of the mutual funds
that attempted to pick stocks which would rise more than the market
average actually ended up performing worse than the market average. For
the average investor who reads the newspaper business pages over a cup
of coffee in the morning, the odds of doing better than full-time
professionals is not very good at all. Trying to pick the stocks that
will gain a great deal in the future is a risky and unlikely way to
become rich.

### Getting Rich the Slow, Boring Way

Many U.S. citizens can accumulate a large amount of wealth during their
lifetimes, if they make two key choices. The first is to complete
additional education and training. In 2020, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics reported median weekly usual earnings for full-time wage and
salary workers age 25 and over that corresponded to annual income of
\$40,612 for those with a high school diploma, \$48,776 for those with a
two-year associate degree, and \$67,860 for those with a four-year
bachelor's degree. Learning is not only good for you, but it pays off
financially, too.

The second key choice is to start saving money early in life, and to
give the power of compound interest a chance. Imagine that at age 25,
you save \$3,000 and place that money into an account that you do not
touch. In the long run, it is not unreasonable to assume a 7% real
annual rate of return (that is, 7% above the rate of inflation) on money
invested in a well-diversified stock portfolio. After 40 years, using
the formula for compound interest, the original \$3,000 investment will
have multiplied nearly fifteen fold:

$3,000{(1 + .07)}^{40} = \text{\$}44,923$

Having \$45,000 does not make you a millionaire. Notice, however, that
this tidy sum is the result of saving \$3,000 exactly once. Saving that
amount every year for several decades---or saving more as income
rises---will multiply the total considerably. This type of wealth will
not rival the riches of Microsoft CEO Bill Gates, but remember that only
half of Americans have any money in mutual funds at all. Accumulating
hundreds of thousands of dollars by retirement is a perfectly achievable
goal for a well-educated person who starts saving early in life---and
that amount of accumulated wealth will put you at or near the top 10% of
all American households. The following Work It Out feature shows the
difference between simple and compound interest, and the power of
compound interest.

### Work It Out {#work-it-out .Heading3Grey}

#### Simple and Compound Interest {#simple-and-compound-interest .Heading4Grey}

Simple interest is an interest rate calculation only on the principal
amount.

Step 1. Learn the formula for simple interest:

$\text{Principal} \times \text{Rate} \times \text{Time} = \text{Interest}$

Step 2. Practice using the simple interest formula.

Example 1: \$100 Deposit at a simple interest rate of 5% held for one
year is:

$\$ 100 \times 0.05 \times 1 = \$ 5$

Simple interest in this example is \$5.

Example 2: \$100 Deposit at a simple interest rate of 5% held for three
years is:

$\$ 100 \times 0.05 \times 3 = \$ 15$

Simple interest in this example is \$15.

Step 3. Calculate the total future amount using this formula:

$\text{Total\ future\ amount} = \text{principal} + \text{interest}$

Step 4. Put the two simple interest formulas together.

$\text{Total\ future\ amount\ (with\ simple\ interest)} = \text{Principal} + \left( \text{Principal} \times \text{Rate} \times \text{Time} \right)$

Step 5. Apply the simple interest formula to our three year example.

$\text{Total\ future\ amount\ (with\ simple\ interest)} = \$ 100 + (\$ 100 \times 0.05 \times 3) = \$ 115$

Compound interest is an interest rate calculation on the principal plus
the accumulated interest.

Step 6. To find the compound interest, we determine the difference
between the future value and the present value of the principal. This is
accomplished as follows:

$\text{Future~Value} = \text{Principal~} \times \ {(\text{1\ +\ interest~rate})}^{\text{time}}$

$\text{Compound\ interest} = \text{Future\ Value}â€“\text{Present\ Valve}$

Step 7. Apply this formula to our three-year scenario. Follow the
calculations in

[Table 17.4](#ch17mod03_tab04)

Table 17.4

Step 8. Note that, after three years, the total is \$115.76. Therefore
the total compound interest is \$15.76. This is \$0.76 more than we
obtained with simple interest. While this may not seem like much, keep
in mind that we were only working with \$100 and over a relatively short
time period. Compound interest can make a huge difference with larger
sums of money and over longer periods of time.

Obtaining additional education and saving money early in life obviously
will not make you rich overnight. Additional education typically means
deferring earning income and living as a student for more years. Saving
money often requires choices like driving an older or less expensive
car, living in a smaller apartment or buying a smaller house, and making
other day-to-day sacrifices. For most people, the tradeoffs for
achieving substantial personal wealth will require effort, patience, and
sacrifice.

### How Capital Markets Transform Financial Flows

Financial capital markets have the power to repackage money as it moves
from those who supply financial capital to those who demand it. Banks
accept checking account deposits and turn them into long-term loans to
companies. Individual firms sell shares of stock and issue bonds to
raise capital. Firms make and sell an astonishing array of goods and
services, but an investor can receive a return on the company's
decisions by buying stock in that company. Financial investors sell and
resell stocks and bonds to one another. Venture capitalists and angel
investors search for promising small companies. Mutual funds combine the
stocks and bonds---and thus, indirectly, the products and
investments---of many different companies.

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/austerebaltic/) to read an
article about how austerity can work. Then visit this
[website](http://openstax.org/l/counteraustere) for another perspective
on austerity.

In this chapter, we discussed the basic mechanisms of financial markets.
(A more advanced course in economics or finance will consider more
sophisticated tools.) The fundamentals of those financial capital
markets remain the same: Firms are trying to raise financial capital and
households are looking for a desirable combination of rate of return,
risk, and liquidity. Financial markets are society's mechanisms for
bringing together these forces of demand and supply.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### The Housing Bubble and the Financial Crisis of 2007 {#the-housing-bubble-and-the-financial-crisis-of-2007 .Heading4Grey}

The housing boom and bust in the United States, and the resulting
multi-trillion-dollar decline in home equity, began with the fall of
home prices starting in 2007. As home values dipped, many home prices
fell below the amount the borrower owed on the mortgage and owners
stopped paying and defaulted on their loan. Banks found that their
assets (loans) became worthless. Many financial institutions around the
world had invested in mortgage-backed securities, or had purchased
insurance on mortgage-backed securities. When housing prices collapsed,
the value of those financial assets collapsed as well. The asset side of
the banks' balance sheets dropped, causing bank failures and bank runs.
Around the globe, financial institutions were bankrupted or nearly so.
The result was a large decrease in lending and borrowing, or a freezing
up of available credit. When credit dries up, the economy is on its
knees. The crisis was not limited to the United States. Iceland,
Ireland, the United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, and Greece all had similar
housing boom and bust cycles, and similar credit freezes.

If businesses cannot access financial capital, they cannot make physical
capital investments. Those investments ultimately lead to job creation.
When credit dried up, businesses invested less, and they ultimately laid
off millions of workers. This caused incomes to drop, which caused
demand to drop. In turn businesses sold less, so they laid off more
workers. Compounding these events, as economic conditions worsened,
financial institutions were even less likely to make loans.

To make matters even worse, as businesses sold less, their expected
future profit decreased, and this led to a drop in stock prices.
Combining all these effects led to major decreases in incomes, demand,
consumption, and employment, and to the Great Recession, which in the
United States officially lasted from December 2007 to June 2009. During
this time, the unemployment rate rose from 5% to a peak of 10.1%. Four
years after the recession officially ended, unemployment was still
stubbornly high, at 7.6%, and 11.8 million people were still unemployed.

As the world's leading consumer, if the United States goes into
recession, it usually drags other countries down with it. The Great
Recession was no exception. With few exceptions, U.S. trading partners
also entered into recessions of their own, of varying lengths, or
suffered slower economic growth. Like the United States, many European
countries also gave direct financial assistance, so-called bailouts, to
the institutions that make up their financial markets. There was good
reason to do this. Financial markets bridge the gap between demanders
and suppliers of financial capital. These institutions and markets need
to function in order for an economy to invest in new financial capital.

However, much of this bailout money was borrowed, and this borrowed
money contributed to another crisis in Europe. Because of the impact on
their budgets of the financial crisis and the resulting bailouts, many
countries found themselves with unsustainably high deficits. They chose
to undertake austerity measures, large decreases in government spending
and large tax increases, in order to reduce their deficits. Greece,
Ireland, Spain, and Portugal all had to undertake relatively severe
austerity measures. The ramifications of this crisis have spread.
Economists even called into question the euro's viability.
