## Critical Thinking Questions

17\.

Are differences in geography behind the differences in absolute
advantages?

18\.

Why does the United States not have an absolute advantage in coffee?

19\.

Look at [Exercise
19.2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/19-self-check-questions#fs-idp176454304).
Compute the opportunity costs of producing sweaters and wine in both
France and Tunisia. Who has the lowest opportunity cost of producing
sweaters and who has the lowest opportunity cost of producing wine?
Explain what it means to have a lower opportunity cost.

20\.

You just overheard your friend say the following: "Poor countries like
Malawi have no absolute advantages. They have poor soil, low investments
in formal education and hence low-skill workers, no capital, and no
natural resources to speak of. Because they have no advantage, they
cannot benefit from trade." How would you respond?

21\.

Look at [Table
19.9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/19-2-what-happens-when-a-country-has-an-absolute-advantage-in-all-goods#Table_33_10).
Is there a range of trades for which there will be no gains?

22\.

You just got a job in Washington, D.C. You move into an apartment with
some acquaintances. All your roommates, however, are slackers and do not
clean up after themselves. You, on the other hand, can clean faster than
each of them. You determine that you are 70% faster at dishes and 10%
faster with vacuuming. All of these tasks have to be done daily. Which
jobs should you assign to your roommates to get the most free time
overall? Assume you have the same number of hours to devote to cleaning.
Now, since you are faster, you seem to get done quicker than your
roommate. What sorts of problems may this create? Can you imagine a
trade-related analogy to this problem?

23\.

Does intra-industry trade contradict the theory of comparative
advantage?

24\.

Do consumers benefit from intra-industry trade?

25\.

Why might intra-industry trade seem surprising from the point of view of
comparative advantage?

26\.

In World Trade Organization meetings, what do you think low-income
countries lobby for?

27\.

Why might a low-income country put up barriers to trade, such as tariffs
on imports?

28\.

Can a nation's comparative advantage change over time? What factors
would make it change?
