## Key Concepts and Summary

### 19.1 Absolute and Comparative Advantage

A country has an absolute advantage in those products in which it has a
productivity edge over other countries; it takes fewer resources to
produce a product. A country has a comparative advantage when it can
produce a good at a lower cost in terms of other goods. Countries that
specialize based on comparative advantage gain from trade.

### 19.2 What Happens When a Country Has an Absolute Advantage in All Goods

Even when a country has high levels of productivity in all goods, it can
still benefit from trade. Gains from trade come about as a result of
comparative advantage. By specializing in a good that it gives up the
least to produce, a country can produce more and offer that additional
output for sale. If other countries specialize in the area of their
comparative advantage as well and trade, the highly productive country
is able to benefit from a lower opportunity cost of production in other
countries.

### 19.3 Intra-industry Trade between Similar Economies

A large share of global trade happens between high-income economies that
are quite similar in having well-educated workers and advanced
technology. These countries practice intra-industry trade, in which they
import and export the same products at the same time, like cars,
machinery, and computers. In the case of intra-industry trade between
economies with similar income levels, the gains from trade come from
specialized learning in very particular tasks and from economies of
scale. Splitting up the value chain means that several stages of
producing a good take place in different countries around the world.

### 19.4 The Benefits of Reducing Barriers to International Trade

Tariffs are placed on imported goods as a way of protecting sensitive
industries, for humanitarian reasons, and for protection against
dumping. Traditionally, tariffs were used as a political tool to protect
certain vested economic, social, and cultural interests. The WTO has
been, and continues to be, a way for nations to meet and negotiate in
order to reduce barriers to trade. The gains of international trade are
very large, especially for smaller countries, but are beneficial to all.
