## 20.4 How Governments Enact Trade Policy: Globally, Regionally, and Nationally

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain the origin and role of the World Trade Organization (WTO)
    and General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
-   Discuss the significance and provide examples of regional trading
    agreements
-   Analyze trade policy at the national level
-   Evaluate long-term trends in barriers to trade

These public policy arguments about how nations should react to
globalization and trade are fought out at several levels: at the global
level through the World Trade Organization and through regional trade
agreements between pairs or groups of countries.

### The World Trade Organization

The World Trade Organization (WTO) was officially born in 1995, but its
history is much longer. In the years after the Great Depression and
World War II, there was a worldwide push to build institutions that
would tie the nations of the world together. The United Nations
officially came into existence in 1945. The World Bank, which assists
the poorest people in the world, and the International Monetary Fund,
which addresses issues raised by international financial transactions,
were both created in 1946. The third planned organization was to be an
International Trade Organization, which would manage international
trade. The United Nations was unable to agree to this. Instead, 27
nations signed the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in
Geneva, Switzerland on October 30, 1947 to provide a forum in which
nations could come together to negotiate reductions in tariffs and other
barriers to trade. In 1995, the GATT transformed into the WTO.

The GATT process was to negotiate an agreement to reduce barriers to
trade, sign that agreement, pause for a while, and then start
negotiating the next agreement. [Table 20.4](#Table_34_06) shows rounds
of talks in the GATT, and now the WTO. Notice that the early rounds of
GATT talks took a relatively short time, included a small number of
countries, and focused almost entirely on reducing tariffs. Since the
mid-1960s, however, rounds of trade talks have taken years, included a
large number of countries, and have included an ever-broadening range of
issues.

Table 20.4 The Negotiating Rounds of GATT and the World Trade
Organization

The sluggish pace of GATT negotiations led to an old joke that GATT
really stood for Gentleman's Agreement to Talk and Talk. The slow pace
of international trade talks, however, is understandable, even sensible.
Having dozens of nations agree to any treaty is a lengthy process. GATT
often set up separate trading rules for certain industries, like
agriculture, and separate trading rules for certain countries, like the
low-income countries. There were rules, exceptions to rules,
opportunities to opt out of rules, and precise wording to be fought over
in every case. Like the GATT before it, the WTO is not a world
government, with power to impose its decisions on others. The total
staff of the WTO Secretariat in 2021 is 625 people and its annual budget
(as of 2020) is \$197 million, which makes it smaller in size than many
large universities.

### Regional Trading Agreements

There are different types of economic integration across the globe,
ranging from free trade agreements, in which participants allow each
other's imports without tariffs or quotas, to common markets, in which
participants have a common external trade policy as well as free trade
within the group, to full economic unions, in which, in addition to a
common market, monetary and fiscal policies are coordinated. Many
nations belong both to the World Trade Organization and to regional
trading agreements.

The best known of these regional trading agreements is the European
Union. In the years after World War II, leaders of several European
nations reasoned that if they could tie their economies together more
closely, they might be more likely to avoid another devastating war.
Their efforts began with a free trade association, evolved into a common
market, and then transformed into what is now a full economic union,
known as the European Union. The EU, as it is often called, has a number
of goals. For example, in the early 2000s it introduced a common
currency for Europe, the euro, and phased out most of the former
national forms of money like the German mark and the French franc,
though a few have retained their own currency. Another key element of
the union is to eliminate barriers to the mobility of goods, labor, and
capital across Europe. In 2016, Britain voted to leave the European
Union---a move that was completed in January 2020.

For the United States, perhaps the best-known regional trading agreement
is the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
[2](#fs-idm352745318) The United States also participates in some
less-prominent regional trading agreements, like the Caribbean Basin
Initiative, which offers reduced tariffs for imports from these
countries, and a free trade agreement with Israel.

2

As of July 1, 2020, NAFTA was officially replaced with the United
States-Mexico-Canada (USMCA) free trade agreement. It is broadly similar
to the original NAFTA.

The world has seen a flood of regional trading agreements in recent
years. About 100 such agreements are now in place. [Table
20.5](#Table_34_07) lists a few of the more prominent ones. Some are
just agreements to continue talking. Others set specific goals for
reducing tariffs, import quotas, and nontariff barriers. One economist
described the current trade treaties as a "spaghetti bowl," which is
what a map with lines connecting all the countries with trade treaties
looks like.

There is concern among economists who favor free trade that some of
these regional agreements may promise free trade, but actually act as a
way for the countries within the regional agreement to try to limit
trade from anywhere else. In some cases, the regional trade agreements
may even conflict with the broader agreements of the World Trade
Organization.

Table 20.5 Some Regional Trade Agreements \* Following the 2016
referendum vote to leave the European Union, the UK government triggered
the withdrawal process on March 29, 2017, setting the date for the UK to
leave by April 2019. In January 2020, the withdrawal was complete and
the United Kingdom is now no longer part of the EU trading bloc. Also,
as of 2020, NAFTA has been replaced by the United States-Mexico-Canada
(USMCA) free trade agreement.

### Trade Policy at the National Level

Yet another dimension of trade policy, along with international and
regional trade agreements, happens at the national level. The United
States, for example, imposes import quotas on sugar, because of a fear
that such imports would drive down the price of sugar and thus injure
domestic sugar producers. One of the jobs of the United States
Department of Commerce is to determine if there is import dumping from
other countries. The United States International Trade Commission---a
government agency---determines whether the dumping has substantially
injured domestic industries, and if so, the president can impose tariffs
that are intended to offset the unfairly low price.

In the arena of trade policy, the battle often seems to be between
national laws that increase protectionism and international agreements
that try to reduce protectionism, like the WTO. Why would a country pass
laws or negotiate agreements to shut out certain foreign products, like
sugar or textiles, while simultaneously negotiating to reduce trade
barriers in general? One plausible answer is that international trade
agreements offer a method for countries to restrain their own special
interests. A member of Congress can say to an industry lobbying for
tariffs or quotas on imports: "Sure would like to help you, but that
pesky WTO agreement just won't let me."

### Link It Up {#link-it-up .Heading3Grey}

If consumers are the biggest losers from trade, why do they not fight
back? The quick answer is because it is easier to organize a small group
of people around a narrow interest (producers) versus a large group that
has diffuse interests (consumers). This is a question about trade policy
theory. Visit this [website](http://openstax.org/l/tradepolicy) and read
the article by Jonathan Rauch.

### Long-Term Trends in Barriers to Trade

In newspaper headlines, trade policy appears mostly as disputes and
acrimony. Countries are almost constantly threatening to challenge other
nations\' "unfair" trading practices. Cases are brought to the dispute
settlement procedures of the WTO, the European Union, NAFTA, and other
regional trading agreements. Politicians in national legislatures,
goaded on by lobbyists, often threaten to pass bills that will
"establish a fair playing field" or "prevent unfair trade"---although
most such bills seek to accomplish these high-sounding goals by placing
more restrictions on trade. Protesters in the streets may object to
specific trade rules or to the entire practice of international trade.

Through all the controversy, the general trend in the last 60 years is
clearly toward lower barriers to trade. The average level of tariffs on
imported products charged by industrialized countries was 40% in 1946.
By 1990, after decades of GATT negotiations, it was down to less than
5%. One of the reasons that GATT negotiations shifted from focusing on
tariff reduction in the early rounds to a broader agenda was that
tariffs had been reduced so dramatically there was not much more to do
in that area. U.S. tariffs have followed this general pattern: After
rising sharply during the Great Depression, tariffs dropped off to less
than 2% by the end of the century. Although measures of import quotas
and nontariff barriers are less exact than those for tariffs, they
generally appear to be at lower levels than they had been previously,
too.

Thus, the last half-century has seen both a dramatic reduction in
government-created barriers to trade, such as tariffs, import quotas,
and nontariff barriers, and also a number of technological developments
that have made international trade easier, like advances in
transportation, communication, and information management. The result
has been the powerful surge of international trade.

These trends were altered by two important events in 2016: the UK vote
to leave the EU and the election of President Trump in the United
States, whose administration pursued a policy of raising trade barriers.
In 2018, tariffs on a broad range of imports from China were raised by
around 25%. As of 2022, the UK has been out of the EU for two years, and
it remains unclear if President Biden's administration will adjust or
remove President Trump's trade barriers.
