## 3.4 Price Ceilings and Price Floors

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain price controls, price ceilings, and price floors
-   Analyze demand and supply as a social adjustment mechanism

To this point in the chapter, we have been assuming that markets are
free, that is, they operate with no government intervention. In this
section, we will explore the outcomes, both anticipated and otherwise,
when government does intervene in a market either to prevent the price
of some good or service from rising "too high" or to prevent the price
of some good or service from falling "too low".

Economists believe there are a small number of fundamental principles
that explain how economic agents respond in different situations. Two of
these principles, which we have already introduced, are the laws of
demand and supply.

Governments can pass laws affecting market outcomes, but no law can
negate these economic principles. Rather, the principles will become
apparent in sometimes unexpected ways, which may undermine the intent of
the government policy. This is one of the major conclusions of this
section.

Controversy sometimes surrounds the prices and quantities established by
demand and supply, especially for products that are considered
necessities. In some cases, discontent over prices turns into public
pressure on politicians, who may then pass legislation to prevent a
certain price from climbing "too high" or falling "too low."

The demand and supply model shows how people and firms will react to the
incentives that these laws provide to control prices, in ways that will
often lead to undesirable consequences. Alternative policy tools can
often achieve the desired goals of price control laws, while avoiding at
least some of their costs and tradeoffs.

### Price Ceilings

Laws that governments enact to regulate prices are called price
controls. Price controls come in two flavors. A price ceiling keeps a
price from rising above a certain level (the "ceiling"), while a price
floor keeps a price from falling below a given level (the "floor"). This
section uses the demand and supply framework to analyze price ceilings.
The next section discusses price floors.

A price ceiling is a legal maximum price that one pays for some good or
service. A government imposes price ceilings in order to keep the price
of some necessary good or service affordable. For example, in 2005
during Hurricane Katrina, the price of bottled water increased above \$5
per gallon. As a result, many people called for price controls on
bottled water to prevent the price from rising so high. In this
particular case, the government did not impose a price ceiling, but
there are other examples of where price ceilings did occur.

In many markets for goods and services, demanders outnumber suppliers.
Consumers, who are also potential voters, sometimes unite behind a
political proposal to hold down a certain price. In some cities, such as
Albany, renters have pressed political leaders to pass rent control
laws, a price ceiling that usually works by stating that landlords can
raise rents by only a certain maximum percentage each year. Some of the
best examples of rent control occur in urban areas such as New York,
Washington D.C., or San Francisco.

Rent control becomes a politically hot topic when rents begin to rise
rapidly. Everyone needs an affordable place to live. Perhaps a change in
tastes makes a certain suburb or town a more popular place to live.
Perhaps locally-based businesses expand, bringing higher incomes and
more people into the area. Such changes can cause a change in the demand
for rental housing, as [Figure 3.21](#CNX_Econ_C03_012) illustrates. The
original equilibrium (E~0~) lies at the intersection of supply curve
S~0~ and demand curve D~0~, corresponding to an equilibrium price of
\$500 and an equilibrium quantity of 15,000 units of rental housing. The
effect of greater income or a change in tastes is to shift the demand
curve for rental housing to the right, as the data in [Table
3.7](#Table_03_10) shows and the shift from D~0~ to D~1~ on the graph.
In this market, at the new equilibrium E~1~, the price of a rental unit
would rise to \$600 and the equilibrium quantity would increase to
17,000 units.

![](media/3-4-price-ceilings-and-price-floors_rId25.jpeg){width="3.29in" height="2.285in"}

Figure 3.21 A Price Ceiling Example---Rent Control The original
intersection of demand and supply occurs at E~0~. If demand shifts from
D~0~ to D~1~, the new equilibrium would be at E~1~---unless a price
ceiling prevents the price from rising. If the price is not permitted to
rise, the quantity supplied remains at 15,000. However, after the change
in demand, the quantity demanded rises to 19,000, resulting in a
shortage.

Table 3.7 Rent Control

Suppose that a city government passes a rent control law to keep the
price at the original equilibrium of \$500 for a typical apartment. In
[Figure 3.21](#CNX_Econ_C03_012), the horizontal line at the price of
\$500 shows the legally fixed maximum price set by the rent control law.
However, the underlying forces that shifted the demand curve to the
right are still there. At that price (\$500), the quantity supplied
remains at the same 15,000 rental units, but the quantity demanded is
19,000 rental units. In other words, the quantity demanded exceeds the
quantity supplied, so there is a shortage of rental housing. One of the
ironies of price ceilings is that while the price ceiling was intended
to help renters, there are actually fewer apartments rented out under
the price ceiling (15,000 rental units) than would be the case at the
market rent of \$600 (17,000 rental units).

Price ceilings do not simply benefit renters at the expense of
landlords. Rather, some renters (or potential renters) lose their
housing as landlords convert apartments to co-ops and condos. Even when
the housing remains in the rental market, landlords tend to spend less
on maintenance and on essentials like heating, cooling, hot water, and
lighting. The first rule of economics is you do not get something for
nothing---everything has an opportunity cost. Thus, if renters obtain
"cheaper" housing than the market requires, they tend to also end up
with lower quality housing.

Price ceilings are enacted in an attempt to keep prices low for those
who need the product. However, when the market price is not allowed to
rise to the equilibrium level, quantity demanded exceeds quantity
supplied, and thus a shortage occurs. Those who manage to purchase the
product at the lower price given by the price ceiling will benefit, but
sellers of the product will suffer, along with those who are not able to
purchase the product at all. Quality is also likely to deteriorate.

### Price Floors

A price floor is the lowest price that one can legally pay for some good
or service. Perhaps the best-known example of a price floor is the
minimum wage, which is based on the view that someone working full time
should be able to afford a basic standard of living. The federal minimum
wage in 2022 was \$7.25 per hour, although some states and localities
have a higher minimum wage. The federal minimum wage yields an annual
income for a single person of \$15,080, which is slightly higher than
the Federal poverty line of \$11,880. Congress periodically raises the
federal minimum wage as the cost of living rises. As of March 2022, the
most recent adjustment occurred in 2009, when the federal minimum wage
was raised from \$6.55 to \$7.25.

Price floors are sometimes called "price supports," because they support
a price by preventing it from falling below a certain level. Around the
world, many countries have passed laws to create agricultural price
supports. Farm prices and thus farm incomes fluctuate, sometimes widely.
Even if, on average, farm incomes are adequate, some years they can be
quite low. The purpose of price supports is to prevent these swings.

The most common way price supports work is that the government enters
the market and buys up the product, adding to demand to keep prices
higher than they otherwise would be. According to the Common
Agricultural Policy reform effective in 2019, the European Union (EU)
will spend about 58 billion euros per year, or 65.5 billion dollars per
year (with the December 2021 exchange rate), or roughly 36% of the EU
budget, on price supports for Europe's farmers.

[Figure 3.22](#CNX_Econ_C03_013) illustrates the effects of a government
program that assures a price above the equilibrium by focusing on the
market for wheat in Europe. In the absence of government intervention,
the price would adjust so that the quantity supplied would equal the
quantity demanded at the equilibrium point E~0~, with price P~0~ and
quantity Q~0~. However, policies to keep prices high for farmers keep
the price above what would have been the market equilibrium level---the
price Pf shown by the dashed horizontal line in the diagram. The result
is a quantity supplied in excess of the quantity demanded (Qd). When
quantity supplied exceeds quantity demanded, a surplus exists.

Economists estimate that the high-income areas of the world, including
the United States, Europe, and Japan, spend roughly \$1 billion per day
in supporting their farmers. If the government is willing to purchase
the excess supply (or to provide payments for others to purchase it),
then farmers will benefit from the price floor, but taxpayers and
consumers of food will pay the costs. Agricultural economists and policy
makers have offered numerous proposals for reducing farm subsidies. In
many countries, however, political support for subsidies for farmers
remains strong. This is either because the population views this as
supporting the traditional rural way of life or because of industry\'s
lobbying power of the agro-business.

![](media/3-4-price-ceilings-and-price-floors_rId31.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.89in"}

Figure 3.22 European Wheat Prices: A Price Floor Example The
intersection of demand (D) and supply (S) would be at the equilibrium
point E~0~. However, a price floor set at Pf holds the price above E~0~
and prevents it from falling. The result of the price floor is that the
quantity supplied Qs exceeds the quantity demanded Qd. There is excess
supply, also called a surplus.
