## Critical Thinking Questions

36\.

Review [Figure
3.4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-1-demand-supply-and-equilibrium-in-markets-for-goods-and-services#CNX_Econ_C03_003).
Suppose the government decided that, since gasoline is a necessity, its
price should be legally capped at \$1.30 per gallon. What do you
anticipate would be the outcome in the gasoline market?

37\.

Explain why the following statement is false: "In the goods market, no
buyer would be willing to pay more than the equilibrium price."

38\.

Explain why the following statement is false: "In the goods market, no
seller would be willing to sell for less than the equilibrium price."

39\.

Consider the demand for hamburgers. If the price of a substitute good
(for example, hot dogs) increases and the price of a complement good
(for example, hamburger buns) increases, can you tell for sure what will
happen to the demand for hamburgers? Why or why not? Illustrate your
answer with a graph.

40\.

How do you suppose the demographics of an aging population of "Baby
Boomers" in the United States will affect the demand for milk? Justify
your answer.

41\.

We know that a change in the price of a product causes a movement along
the demand curve. Suppose consumers believe that prices will be rising
in the future. How will that affect demand for the product in the
present? Can you show this graphically?

42\.

Suppose there is a soda tax to curb obesity. What should a reduction in
the soda tax do to the supply of sodas and to the equilibrium price and
quantity? Can you show this graphically? *Hint*: Assume that the soda
tax is collected from the sellers.

43\.

Use the four-step process to analyze the impact of the advent of the
iPod (or other portable digital music players) on the equilibrium price
and quantity of the Sony Walkman (or other portable audio cassette
players).

44\.

Use the four-step process to analyze the impact of a reduction in
tariffs on imports of iPods on the equilibrium price and quantity of
Sony Walkman-type products.

45\.

Suppose both of these events took place at the same time. Combine your
analyses of the impacts of the iPod and the tariff reduction to
determine the likely impact on the equilibrium price and quantity of
Sony Walkman-type products. Show your answer graphically.

46\.

Most government policy decisions have winners and losers. What are the
effects of raising the minimum wage? It is more complex than simply
producers lose and workers gain. Who are the winners and who are the
losers, and what exactly do they win and lose? To what extent does the
policy change achieve its goals?

47\.

Agricultural price supports result in governments holding large
inventories of agricultural products. Why do you think the government
cannot simply give the products away to people experiencing poverty?

48\.

Can you propose a policy that would induce the market to supply more
rental housing units?

49\.

What term would an economist use to describe what happens when a shopper
gets a "good deal" on a product?

50\.

Explain why voluntary transactions improve social welfare.

51\.

Why would a free market never operate at a quantity greater than the
equilibrium quantity? *Hint:* What would be required for a transaction
to occur at that quantity?
