## 4.2 Demand and Supply in Financial Markets

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Identify the demanders and suppliers in a financial market
-   Explain how interest rates can affect supply and demand
-   Analyze the economic effects of U.S. debt in terms of domestic
    financial markets
-   Explain the role of price ceilings and usury laws in the U.S.

United States\' households, institutions, and domestic businesses saved
almost \$1.3 trillion in 2015. Where did that savings go and how was it
used? Some of the savings ended up in banks, which in turn loaned the
money to individuals or businesses that wanted to borrow money. Some was
invested in private companies or loaned to government agencies that
wanted to borrow money to raise funds for purposes like building roads
or mass transit. Some firms reinvested their savings in their own
businesses.

In this section, we will determine how the demand and supply model links
those who wish to supply financial capital (i.e., savings) with those
who demand financial capital (i.e., borrowing). Those who save money (or
make financial investments, which is the same thing), whether
individuals or businesses, are on the supply side of the financial
market. Those who borrow money are on the demand side of the financial
market. For a more detailed treatment of the different kinds of
financial investments like bank accounts, stocks and bonds, see the
[Financial
Markets](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/17-introduction-to-financial-markets)
chapter.

### Who Demands and Who Supplies in Financial Markets?

In any market, the price is what suppliers receive and what demanders
pay. In financial markets, those who supply financial capital through
saving expect to receive a rate of return, while those who demand
financial capital by receiving funds expect to pay a rate of return.
This rate of return can come in a variety of forms, depending on the
type of investment.

The simplest example of a rate of return is the interest rate. For
example, when you supply money into a savings account at a bank, you
receive interest on your deposit. The interest the bank pays you as a
percent of your deposits is the interest rate. Similarly, if you demand
a loan to buy a car or a computer, you will need to pay interest on the
money you borrow.

Let's consider the market for borrowing money with credit cards. In
2021, almost 200 million Americans were cardholders. Credit cards allow
you to borrow money from the card\'s issuer, and pay back the borrowed
amount plus interest, although most allow you a period of time in which
you can repay the loan without paying interest. A typical credit card
interest rate ranges from 12% to 18% per year. In May 2021, Americans
had about \$807 billion outstanding in credit card debts. As of 2021,
just over 45% of American families carried some credit card debt. Let's
say that, on average, the annual interest rate for credit card borrowing
is 15% per year. Thus, Americans pay tens of billions of dollars every
year in interest on their credit cards---plus basic fees for the credit
card or fees for late payments.

[Figure 4.5](#CNX_Econ_C04_005) illustrates demand and supply in the
financial market for credit cards. The horizontal axis of the financial
market shows the quantity of money loaned or borrowed in this market.
The vertical or price axis shows the rate of return, which in the case
of credit card borrowing we can measure with an interest rate. [Table
4.5](#Table_04_05) shows the quantity of financial capital that
consumers demand at various interest rates and the quantity that credit
card firms (often banks) are willing to supply.

![](media/4-2-demand-and-supply-in-financial-markets_rId25.jpeg){width="4.88in" height="2.53in"}

Figure 4.5 Demand and Supply for Borrowing Money with Credit Cards In
this market for credit card borrowing, the demand curve (D) for
borrowing financial capital intersects the supply curve (S) for lending
financial capital at equilibrium E. At the equilibrium, the interest
rate (the "price" in this market) is 15% and the quantity of financial
capital loaned and borrowed is \$600 billion. The equilibrium price is
where the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied are equal. At an
above-equilibrium interest rate like 21%, the quantity of financial
capital supplied would increase to \$750 billion, but the quantity
demanded would decrease to \$480 billion. At a below-equilibrium
interest rate like 13%, the quantity of financial capital demanded would
increase to \$700 billion, but the quantity of financial capital
supplied would decrease to \$510 billion.

Table 4.5 Demand and Supply for Borrowing Money with Credit Cards

The laws of demand and supply continue to apply in the financial
markets. According to the law of demand, a higher rate of return (that
is, a higher price) will decrease the quantity demanded. As the interest
rate rises, consumers will reduce the quantity that they borrow.
According to the law of supply, a higher price increases the quantity
supplied. Consequently, as the interest rate paid on credit card
borrowing rises, more firms will be eager to issue credit cards and to
encourage customers to use them. Conversely, if the interest rate on
credit cards falls, the quantity of financial capital supplied in the
credit card market will decrease and the quantity demanded will
increase.

### Equilibrium in Financial Markets

In the financial market for credit cards in [Figure
4.5](#CNX_Econ_C04_005), the supply curve (S) and the demand curve (D)
cross at the equilibrium point (E). The equilibrium occurs at an
interest rate of 15%, where the quantity of funds demanded and the
quantity supplied are equal at an equilibrium quantity of \$600 billion.

If the interest rate (remember, this measures the "price" in the
financial market) is above the equilibrium level, then an excess supply,
or a surplus, of financial capital will arise in this market. For
example, at an interest rate of 21%, the quantity of funds supplied
increases to \$750 billion, while the quantity demanded decreases to
\$480 billion. At this above-equilibrium interest rate, firms are eager
to supply loans to credit card borrowers, but relatively few people or
businesses wish to borrow. As a result, some credit card firms will
lower the interest rates (or other fees) they charge to attract more
business. This strategy will push the interest rate down toward the
equilibrium level.

If the interest rate is below the equilibrium, then excess demand or a
shortage of funds occurs in this market. At an interest rate of 13%, the
quantity of funds credit card borrowers demand increases to \$700
billion, but the quantity credit card firms are willing to supply is
only \$510 billion. In this situation, credit card firms will perceive
that they are overloaded with eager borrowers and conclude that they
have an opportunity to raise interest rates or fees. The interest rate
will face economic pressures to creep up toward the equilibrium level.

The FRED database publishes some two dozen measures of interest rates,
including interest rates on credit cards, automobile loans, personal
loans, mortgage loans, and more. You can find these at the FRED
[website](https://openstax.org/l/FRED_stlouis).

### Shifts in Demand and Supply in Financial Markets

Those who supply financial capital face two broad decisions: how much to
save, and how to divide up their savings among different forms of
financial investments. We will discuss each of these in turn.

Participants in financial markets must decide when they prefer to
consume goods: now or in the future. Economists call this intertemporal
decision making because it involves decisions across time. Unlike a
decision about what to buy from the grocery store, people make
investment or savings decisions across a period of time, sometimes a
long period.

Most workers save for retirement because their income in the present is
greater than their needs, while the opposite will be true once they
retire. Thus, they save today and supply financial markets. If their
income increases, they save more. If their perceived situation in the
future changes, they change the amount of their saving. For example,
there is some evidence that Social Security, the program that workers
pay into in order to qualify for government checks after retirement, has
tended to reduce the quantity of financial capital that workers save. If
this is true, Social Security has shifted the supply of financial
capital at any interest rate to the left.

By contrast, many college students need money today when their income is
low (or nonexistent) to pay their college expenses. As a result, they
borrow today and demand from financial markets. Once they graduate and
become employed, they will pay back the loans. Individuals borrow money
to purchase homes or cars. A business seeks financial investment so that
it has the funds to build a factory or invest in a research and
development project that will not pay off for five years, ten years, or
even more. Thus, when consumers and businesses have greater confidence
that they will be able to repay in the future, the quantity demanded of
financial capital at any given interest rate will shift to the right.

For example, in the technology boom of the late 1990s, many businesses
became extremely confident that investments in new technology would have
a high rate of return, and their demand for financial capital shifted to
the right. Conversely, during the 2008 and 2009 Great Recession, their
demand for financial capital at any given interest rate shifted to the
left.

To this point, we have been looking at saving in total. Now let us
consider what affects saving in different types of financial
investments. In deciding between different forms of financial
investments, suppliers of financial capital will have to consider the
rates of return and the risks involved. Rate of return is a positive
attribute of investments, but risk is a negative. If Investment A
becomes more risky, or the return diminishes, then savers will shift
their funds to Investment B---and the supply curve of financial capital
for Investment A will shift back to the left while the supply curve of
capital for Investment B shifts to the right.

### The United States as a Global Borrower

In the global economy, trillions of dollars of financial investment
cross national borders every year. In the early 2000s, financial
investors from foreign countries were investing several hundred billion
dollars per year more in the U.S. economy than U.S. financial investors
were investing abroad. The following Work It Out deals with one of the
macroeconomic concerns for the U.S. economy in recent years.

### Work It Out {#work-it-out .Heading3Grey}

#### The Effect of Growing U.S. Debt {#the-effect-of-growing-u.s.-debt .Heading4Grey}

Imagine that foreign investors viewed the U.S. economy as a less
desirable place to put their money because of fears about the growth of
the U.S. public debt. Using the four-step process for analyzing how
changes in supply and demand affect equilibrium outcomes, how would
increased U.S. public debt affect the equilibrium price and quantity for
capital in U.S. financial markets?

Step 1. Draw a diagram showing demand and supply for financial capital
that represents the original scenario in which foreign investors are
pouring money into the U.S. economy. [Figure 4.6](#CNX_Econ_C04_014)
shows a demand curve, D, and a supply curve, S, where the supply of
capital includes the funds arriving from foreign investors. The original
equilibrium E~0~ occurs at interest rate R~0~ and quantity of financial
investment Q~0~.

![](media/4-2-demand-and-supply-in-financial-markets_rId37.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.535in"}

Figure 4.6 The United States as a Global Borrower Before U.S. Debt
Uncertainty The graph shows the demand for financial capital from and
supply of financial capital into the U.S. financial markets by the
foreign sector before the increase in uncertainty regarding U.S. public
debt. The original equilibrium (E~0~) occurs at an equilibrium rate of
return (R~0~) and the equilibrium quantity is at Q~0~.

Step 2. Will the diminished confidence in the U.S. economy as a place to
invest affect demand or supply of financial capital? Yes, it will affect
supply. Many foreign investors look to the U.S. financial markets to
store their money in safe financial vehicles with low risk and stable
returns. Diminished confidence means U.S. financial assets will be seen
as more risky.

Step 3. Will supply increase or decrease? When the enthusiasm of foreign
investors' for investing their money in the U.S. economy diminishes, the
supply of financial capital shifts to the left. [Figure
4.7](#CNX_Econ_C04_006) shows the supply curve shift from S~0~ to S~1~.

![](media/4-2-demand-and-supply-in-financial-markets_rId40.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.535in"}

Figure 4.7 The United States as a Global Borrower Before and After U.S.
Debt Uncertainty The graph shows the demand for financial capital and
supply of financial capital into the U.S. financial markets by the
foreign sector before and after the increase in uncertainty regarding
U.S. public debt. The original equilibrium (E~0~) occurs at an
equilibrium rate of return (R~0~) and the equilibrium quantity is at
Q~0~.

Step 4. Thus, foreign investors' diminished enthusiasm leads to a new
equilibrium, E~1~, which occurs at the higher interest rate, R~1~, and
the lower quantity of financial investment, Q~1~. In short, U.S.
borrowers will have to pay more interest on their borrowing.

The economy has experienced an enormous inflow of foreign capital.
According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, by the third quarter
of 2021, U.S. investors had accumulated \$34.45 trillion of foreign
assets, but foreign investors owned a total of \$50.53 trillion of U.S.
assets. If foreign investors were to pull their money out of the U.S.
economy and invest elsewhere in the world, the result could be a
significantly lower quantity of financial investment in the United
States, available only at a higher interest rate. This reduced inflow of
foreign financial investment could impose hardship on U.S. consumers and
firms interested in borrowing.

In a modern, developed economy, financial capital often moves invisibly
through electronic transfers between one bank account and another. Yet
we can analyze these flows of funds with the same tools of demand and
supply as markets for goods or labor.

### Price Ceilings in Financial Markets: Usury Laws

As we noted earlier, about 200 million Americans own credit cards, and
their interest payments and fees total tens of billions of dollars each
year. It is little wonder that political pressures sometimes arise for
setting limits on the interest rates or fees that credit card companies
charge. The firms that issue credit cards, including banks, oil
companies, phone companies, and retail stores, respond that the higher
interest rates are necessary to cover the losses created by those who
borrow on their credit cards and who do not repay on time or at all.
These companies also point out that cardholders can avoid paying
interest if they pay their bills on time.

Consider the credit card market as [Figure 4.8](#CNX_Econ_C04_007)
illustrates. In this financial market, the vertical axis shows the
interest rate (which is the price in the financial market). Demanders in
the credit card market are households and businesses. Suppliers are the
companies that issue credit cards. This figure does not use specific
numbers, which would be hypothetical in any case, but instead focuses on
the underlying economic relationships. Imagine a law imposes a price
ceiling that holds the interest rate charged on credit cards at the rate
Rc, which lies below the interest rate R~0~ that would otherwise have
prevailed in the market. The horizontal dashed line at interest rate
R~c~ in [Figure 4.8](#CNX_Econ_C04_007) shows the price ceiling. The
demand and supply model predicts that at the lower price ceiling
interest rate, the quantity demanded of credit card debt will increase
from its original level of Q~0~ to Qd; however, the quantity supplied of
credit card debt will decrease from the original Q~0~ to Qs. At the
price ceiling (Rc), quantity demanded will exceed quantity supplied.
Consequently, a number of people who want to have credit cards and are
willing to pay the prevailing interest rate will find that companies are
unwilling to issue cards to them. The result will be a credit shortage.

![](media/4-2-demand-and-supply-in-financial-markets_rId46.jpeg){width="3.25in" height="2.52in"}

Figure 4.8 Credit Card Interest Rates: Another Price Ceiling Example The
original intersection of demand D and supply S occurs at equilibrium
E~0~. However, a price ceiling is set at the interest rate Rc, below the
equilibrium interest rate R~0~, and so the interest rate cannot adjust
upward to the equilibrium. At the price ceiling, the quantity demanded,
Qd, exceeds the quantity supplied, Qs. There is excess demand, also
called a shortage.

Many states do have usury laws, which impose an upper limit on the
interest rate that lenders can charge. However, in many cases these
upper limits are well above the market interest rate. For example, if
the interest rate is not allowed to rise above 30% per year, it can
still fluctuate below that level according to market forces. A price
ceiling that is set at a relatively high level is nonbinding, and it
will have no practical effect unless the equilibrium price soars high
enough to exceed the price ceiling.
