## 5.4 Elasticity in Areas Other Than Price

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Calculate the income elasticity of demand and the cross-price
    elasticity of demand
-   Calculate the elasticity in labor and financial capital markets
    through an understanding of the elasticity of labor supply and the
    elasticity of savings
-   Apply concepts of price elasticity to real-world situations

The basic idea of elasticity---how a percentage change in one variable
causes a percentage change in another variable---does not just apply to
the responsiveness of quantity supplied and quantity demanded to changes
in the price of a product. Recall that quantity demanded (Qd) depends on
income, tastes and preferences, the prices of related goods, and so on,
as well as price. Similarly, quantity supplied (Qs) depends on factors
such as the cost of production, as well as price. We can measure
elasticity for any determinant of quantity supplied and quantity
demanded, not just the price.

### Income Elasticity of Demand

The income elasticity of demand is the percentage change in quantity
demanded divided by the percentage change in income.

![multiline equation row 1 Income elasticity of demand equals percent
sign change in quantity demanded divided by percent sign change in
income](media/5-4-elasticity-in-areas-other-than-price_rId23.png){width="3.7395833333333335in" height="0.25in"}

For most products, most of the time, the income elasticity of demand is
positive: that is, a rise in income will cause an increase in the
quantity demanded. This pattern is common enough that we refer to these
goods as normal goods. However, for a few goods, an increase in income
means that one might purchase less of the good. For example, those with
a higher income might buy fewer hamburgers, because they are buying more
steak instead, or those with a higher income might buy less cheap wine
and more imported beer. When the income elasticity of demand is
negative, we call the good an inferior good.

We introduced the concepts of normal and inferior goods in [Demand and
Supply](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-introduction-to-demand-and-supply).
A higher level of income causes a demand curve to shift to the right for
a normal good, which means that the income elasticity of demand is
positive. How far the demand shifts depends on the income elasticity of
demand. A higher income elasticity means a larger shift. However, for an
inferior good, that is, when the income elasticity of demand is
negative, a higher level of income would cause the demand curve for that
good to shift to the left. Again, how much it shifts depends on how
large the (negative) income elasticity is.

### Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand

A change in the price of one good can shift the quantity demanded for
another good. If the two goods are complements, like bread and peanut
butter, then a drop in the price of one good will lead to an increase in
the quantity demanded of the other good. However, if the two goods are
substitutes, like plane tickets and train tickets, then a drop in the
price of one good will cause people to substitute toward that good, and
to reduce consumption of the other good. Cheaper plane tickets lead to
fewer train tickets, and vice versa.

The cross-price elasticity of demand puts some meat on the bones of
these ideas. The term "cross-price" refers to the idea that the price of
one good is affecting the quantity demanded of a different good.
Specifically, the cross-price elasticity of demand is the percentage
change in the quantity of good A that is demanded as a result of a
percentage change in the price of good B.

![multiline equation row 1 Cross minus price elasticity of demand equals
percent sign change in Qd of good cap A divided by percent sign change
in price of good cap B](media/5-4-elasticity-in-areas-other-than-price_rId31.png){width="3.7916666666666665in"
height="0.25in"}

Substitute goods have positive cross-price elasticities of demand: if
good A is a substitute for good B, like coffee and tea, then a higher
price for B will mean a greater quantity consumed of A. Complement goods
have negative cross-price elasticities: if good A is a complement for
good B, like coffee and sugar, then a higher price for B will mean a
lower quantity consumed of A.

### Elasticity in Labor and Financial Capital Markets

The concept of elasticity applies to any market, not just markets for
goods and services. In the labor market, for example, the wage
elasticity of labor supply---that is, the percentage change in hours
worked divided by the percentage change in wages---will reflect the
shape of the labor supply curve. Specifically:

![multiline equation row 1 Elasticity of labor supply equals percent
sign change in quantity of labor supplied divided by percent sign change
in wage](media/5-4-elasticity-in-areas-other-than-price_rId36.png){width="3.84375in" height="0.25in"}

The wage elasticity of labor supply for teenage workers is generally
fairly elastic: that is, a certain percentage change in wages will lead
to a larger percentage change in the quantity of hours worked.
Conversely, the wage elasticity of labor supply for adult workers in
their thirties and forties is fairly inelastic. When wages move up or
down by a certain percentage amount, the quantity of hours that adults
in their prime earning years are willing to supply changes but by a
lesser percentage amount.

In markets for financial capital, the elasticity of savings---that is,
the percentage change in the quantity of savings divided by the
percentage change in interest rates---will describe the shape of the
supply curve for financial capital. That is:

![multiline equation row 1 Elasticity of savings equals percent sign
change in quantity of financial savings divided by percent sign change
in interest rate](media/5-4-elasticity-in-areas-other-than-price_rId39.png){width="3.6145833333333335in"
height="0.25in"}

Sometimes laws are proposed that seek to increase the quantity of
savings by offering tax breaks so that the return on savings is higher.
Such a policy will have a comparatively large impact on increasing the
quantity saved if the supply curve for financial capital is elastic,
because then a given percentage increase in the return to savings will
cause a higher percentage increase in the quantity of savings. However,
if the supply curve for financial capital is highly inelastic, then a
percentage increase in the return to savings will cause only a small
increase in the quantity of savings. The evidence on the supply curve of
financial capital is controversial but, at least in the short run, the
elasticity of savings with respect to the interest rate appears fairly
inelastic.

### Expanding the Concept of Elasticity

The elasticity concept does not even need to relate to a typical supply
or demand curve at all. For example, imagine that you are studying
whether the Internal Revenue Service should spend more money on auditing
tax returns. We can frame the question in terms of the elasticity of tax
collections with respect to spending on tax enforcement; that is, what
is the percentage change in tax collections derived from a given
percentage change in spending on tax enforcement?

With all of the elasticity concepts that we have just described, some of
which are in [Table 5.4](#Table_05_08), the possibility of confusion
arises. When you hear the phrases "elasticity of demand" or "elasticity
of supply," they refer to the elasticity with respect to price.
Sometimes, either to be extremely clear or because economists are
discussing a wide variety of elasticities, we will call the elasticity
of demand or the demand elasticity the price elasticity of demand or the
"elasticity of demand with respect to price." Similarly, economists
sometimes use the term elasticity of supply or the supply elasticity, to
avoid any possibility of confusion, the price elasticity of supply or
"the elasticity of supply with respect to price." However, in whatever
context, the idea of elasticity always refers to percentage change in
one variable, almost always a price or money variable, and how it causes
a percentage change in another variable, typically a quantity variable
of some kind.

Table 5.4 Formulas for Calculating Elasticity

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### That Will Be How Much? {#that-will-be-how-much .Heading4Grey}

How did the 60% price increase in 2011 end up for Netflix? It has been a
very bumpy ride.

Before the price increase, there were about 24.6 million U.S.
subscribers. After the price increase, 810,000 infuriated U.S. consumers
canceled their Netflix subscriptions, dropping the total number of
subscribers to 23.79 million. Fast forward to June 2013, when there were
36 million streaming Netflix subscribers in the United States. This was
an increase of 11.4 million subscribers since the price increase---an
average per quarter growth of about 1.6 million. This growth is less
than the 2 million per quarter increases Netflix experienced in the
fourth quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011.

During the first year after the price increase, the firm's stock price
(a measure of future expectations for the firm) fell from about \$33.60
per share per share to just under \$7.80. By the end of 2016, however,
the stock price was at \$123 per share. By the end of 2021, the stock
price was just over \$600 per share, and Netflix had more than 214
million subscribers in fifty countries.

What happened? Obviously, Netflix company officials understood the law
of demand. Company officials reported, when announcing the price
increase, this could result in the loss of about 600,000 existing
subscribers. Using the elasticity of demand formula, it is easy to see
company officials expected an inelastic response:

![multiline equation row 1 Blank equals en dash 600,000 slash left
bracket left parenthesis 24 million plus 24.6 million right parenthesis
slash two right bracket divided by dollar sign six slash left bracket
left parenthesis dollar sign 10 plus dollar sign 16 right parenthesis
slash two right bracket row 2 Blank equals en dash 600,000 slash 24.3
million divided by dollar sign six slash dollar sign 13 row 3 Blank
equals en dash 0.025 divided by 0.46 row 4 Blank equals en dash
0.05](media/5-4-elasticity-in-areas-other-than-price_rId48.png){width="2.1770833333333335in"
height="1.0729166666666667in"}

In addition, Netflix officials had anticipated the price increase would
have little impact on attracting new customers. Netflix anticipated
adding up to 1.29 million new subscribers in the third quarter of 2011.
It is true this was slower growth than the firm had experienced---about
2 million per quarter.

Why was the estimate of customers leaving so far off? In the more than
two decades since Netflix had been founded, there was an increase in the
number of close, but not perfect, substitutes. Consumers now had choices
ranging from Vudu, Amazon Prime, Hulu, and Redbox, to retail stores.
Jaime Weinman reported in *Maclean's* that Redbox kiosks are "a
five-minute drive for less from 68 percent of Americans, and it seems
that many people still find a five-minute drive more convenient than
loading up a movie online." It seems that in 2012, many consumers still
preferred a physical DVD disk over streaming video.

What missteps did the Netflix management make? In addition to misjudging
the elasticity of demand, by failing to account for close substitutes,
it seems they may have also misjudged customers' preferences and tastes.
However, the very substantial increase over time in the number of
Netflix subscribers suggests that the preference for streaming video may
well have overtaken the preference for physical DVD disks. Netflix, the
source of numerous late night talk show laughs and jabs in 2011, may yet
have the last laugh.
