## Key Concepts and Summary

### 5.1 Price Elasticity of Demand and Price Elasticity of Supply

Price elasticity measures the responsiveness of the quantity demanded or
supplied of a good to a change in its price. We compute it as the
percentage change in quantity demanded (or supplied) divided by the
percentage change in price. We can describe elasticity as elastic (or
very responsive), unit elastic, or inelastic (not very responsive).
Elastic demand or supply curves indicate that quantity demanded or
supplied respond to price changes in a greater than proportional manner.
An inelastic demand or supply curve is one where a given percentage
change in price will cause a smaller percentage change in quantity
demanded or supplied. A unitary elasticity means that a given percentage
change in price leads to an equal percentage change in quantity demanded
or supplied.

### 5.2 Polar Cases of Elasticity and Constant Elasticity

Infinite or perfect elasticity refers to the extreme case where either
the quantity demanded or supplied changes by an infinite amount in
response to any change in price at all. Zero elasticity refers to the
extreme case in which a percentage change in price, no matter how large,
results in zero change in quantity. Constant unitary elasticity in
either a supply or demand curve refers to a situation where a price
change of one percent results in a quantity change of one percent.

### 5.3 Elasticity and Pricing

In the market for goods and services, quantity supplied and quantity
demanded are often relatively slow to react to changes in price in the
short run, but react more substantially in the long run. As a result,
demand and supply often (but not always) tend to be relatively inelastic
in the short run and relatively elastic in the long run. A tax incidence
depends on the relative price elasticity of supply and demand. When
supply is more elastic than demand, buyers bear most of the tax burden,
and when demand is more elastic than supply, producers bear most of the
cost of the tax. Tax revenue is larger the more inelastic the demand and
supply are.

### 5.4 Elasticity in Areas Other Than Price

Elasticity is a general term, that reflects responsiveness. It refers to
the change of one variable divided by the percentage change of a related
variable that we can apply to many economic connections. For instance,
the income elasticity of demand is the percentage change in quantity
demanded divided by the percentage change in income. The cross-price
elasticity of demand is the percentage change in the quantity demanded
of a good divided by the percentage change in the price of another good.
Elasticity applies in labor markets and financial capital markets just
as it does in markets for goods and services. The wage elasticity of
labor supply is the percentage change in the quantity of hours supplied
divided by the percentage change in the wage. The elasticity of savings
with respect to interest rates is the percentage change in the quantity
of savings divided by the percentage change in interest rates.
