![](media/6-introduction-to-consumer-choices_rId20.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.6999989063867016in"}

Figure 6.1 Investment Choices We generally view higher education as a
good investment, if one can afford it, regardless of the state of the
economy. (Credit: modification of "Commencement" by
roanokecollege/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

### Chapter Objectives {#chapter-objectives .Heading3Grey}

In this chapter, you will learn about:

-   Consumption Choices
-   How Changes in Income and Prices Affect Consumption Choices
-   How Consumer Choices Might Not Always be Rational

## Introduction to Consumer Choices

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### Making Choices {#making-choices .Heading4Grey}

The 2008--2009 Great Recession touched families around the globe. In too
many countries, workers found themselves out of a job. In developed
countries, unemployment compensation provided a safety net, but families
still saw a marked decrease in disposable income and had to make tough
spending decisions. Of course, non-essential, discretionary spending was
the first to go.

Even so, there was one particular category that saw a universal increase
in spending world-wide during that time---an 18% uptick in the United
States, specifically. You might guess that consumers began eating more
meals at home, increasing grocery store spending; however, the Bureau of
Labor Statistics' Consumer Expenditure Survey, which tracks U.S. food
spending over time, showed "real total food spending by U.S. households
declined five percent between 2006 and 2009." So, it was not groceries.
What product would people around the world demand more of during tough
economic times, and more importantly, why? (Find out at chapter's end.)

That question leads us to this chapter's topic---analyzing how consumers
make choices and how changes affect those choices. For instance, do
changes in prices matter more or less than changes in a consumer's
income? Can a small change in circumstances alter the consumers'
perception of a product or even of their own resources? While many
choices may seem straightforward, there is often much more to consider.

Microeconomics seeks to understand the behavior of individual economic
agents such as individuals and businesses. Economists believe that we
can analyze individuals' decisions, such as what goods and services to
buy, as choices we make within certain budget constraints. Generally,
consumers are trying to get the most for their limited budget. In
economic terms they are trying to maximize total utility, or
satisfaction, given their budget constraint.

Everyone has their own personal tastes and preferences. The French say:
*Chacun à son goût*, or "Each to his own taste." An old Latin saying
states, *De gustibus non est disputandum* or "There's no disputing about
taste." If people base their decisions on their own tastes and personal
preferences, however, then how can economists hope to analyze the
choices consumers make?

An economic explanation for why people make different choices begins
with accepting the proverbial wisdom that tastes are a matter of
personal preference. However, economists also believe that the choices
people make are influenced by their incomes, by the prices of goods and
services they consume, and by factors like where they live. This chapter
introduces the economic theory of how consumers make choices about what
goods and services to buy with their limited income.

The analysis in this chapter will build on the budget constraint that we
introduced in the [Choice in a World of
Scarcity](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/2-introduction-to-choice-in-a-world-of-scarcity)
chapter. This chapter will also illustrate how economic theory provides
a tool to systematically look at the full range of possible consumption
choices to predict how consumption responds to changes in prices or
incomes. After reading this chapter, consult the appendix [Indifference
Curves](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/b-indifference-curves)
to learn more about representing utility and choice through indifference
curves.
