## Problems

16\.

Praxilla, who lived in ancient Greece, derives utility from reading
poems and from eating cucumbers. Praxilla gets 30 units of marginal
utility from her first poem, 27 units of marginal utility from her
second poem, 24 units of marginal utility from her third poem, and so
on, with marginal utility declining by three units for each additional
poem. Praxilla gets six units of marginal utility for each of her first
three cucumbers consumed, five units of marginal utility for each of her
next three cucumbers consumed, four units of marginal utility for each
of the following three cucumbers consumed, and so on, with marginal
utility declining by one for every three cucumbers consumed. A poem
costs three bronze coins but a cucumber costs only one bronze coin.
Praxilla has 18 bronze coins. Sketch Praxilla's budget set between poems
and cucumbers, placing poems on the vertical axis and cucumbers on the
horizontal axis. Start off with the choice of zero poems and 18
cucumbers, and calculate the changes in marginal utility of moving along
the budget line to the next choice of one poem and 15 cucumbers. Using
this step-by-step process based on marginal utility, create a table and
identify Praxilla's utility-maximizing choice. Compare the marginal
utility of the two goods and the relative prices at the optimal choice
to see if the expected relationship holds. *Hint*: Label the table
columns: 1) Choice, 2) Marginal Gain from More Poems, 3) Marginal Loss
from Fewer Cucumbers, 4) Overall Gain or Loss, 5) Is the previous choice
optimal? Label the table rows: 1) 0 Poems and 18 Cucumbers, 2) 1 Poem
and 15 Cucumbers, 3) 2 Poems and 12 Cucumbers, 4) 3 Poems and 9
Cucumbers, 5) 4 Poems and 6 Cucumbers, 6) 5 Poems and 3 Cucumbers, 7) 6
Poems and 0 Cucumbers.

17\.

If a 10% decrease in the price of one product that you buy causes an 8%
increase in quantity demanded of that product, will another 10% decrease
in the price cause another 8% increase (no more and no less) in quantity
demanded?
