## Key Concepts and Summary

### 7.1 Explicit and Implicit Costs, and Accounting and Economic Profit

Privately owned firms are motivated to earn profits. Profit is the
difference between revenues and costs. While accounting profit considers
only explicit costs, economic profit considers both explicit and
implicit costs.

### 7.2 Production in the Short Run

Production is the process a firm uses to transform inputs (e.g., labor,
capital, raw materials, etc.) into outputs. It is not possible to vary
fixed inputs (e.g., capital) in a short period of time. Thus, in the
short run the only way to change output is to change the variable inputs
(e.g., labor). Marginal product is the additional output a firm obtains
by employing more labor in production. At some point, employing
additional labor leads to diminishing marginal productivity, meaning the
additional output obtained is less than for the previous increment to
labor. Mathematically, marginal product is the slope of the total
product curve.

### 7.3 Costs in the Short Run

For every input (e.g., labor), there is an associated factor payment
(e.g., wages and salaries). The cost of production for a given quantity
of output is the sum of the amount of each input required to produce
that quantity of output times the associated factor payment.

In a short-run perspective, we can divide a firm's total costs into
fixed costs, which a firm must incur before producing any output, and
variable costs, which the firm incurs in the act of producing. Fixed
costs are sunk costs; that is, because they are in the past and the firm
cannot alter them, they should play no role in economic decisions about
future production or pricing. Variable costs typically show diminishing
marginal returns, so that the marginal cost of producing higher levels
of output rises.

We calculate marginal cost by taking the change in total cost (or the
change in variable cost, which will be the same thing) and dividing it
by the change in output, for each possible change in output. Marginal
costs are typically rising. A firm can compare marginal cost to the
additional revenue it gains from selling another unit to find out
whether its marginal unit is adding to profit.

We calculate average total cost by taking total cost and dividing by
total output at each different level of output. Average costs are
typically U-shaped on a graph. If a firm's average cost of production is
lower than the market price, a firm will be earning profits.

We calculate average variable cost by taking variable cost and dividing
by the total output at each level of output. Average variable costs are
typically U-shaped. If a firm's average variable cost of production is
lower than the market price, then the firm would be earning profits if
fixed costs are left out of the picture.

### 7.4 Production in the Long Run

In the long run, all inputs are variable. Since diminishing marginal
productivity is caused by fixed capital, there are no diminishing
returns in the long run. Firms can choose the optimal capital stock to
produce their desired level of output.

### 7.5 Costs in the Long Run

A production technology refers to a specific combination of labor,
physical capital, and technology that makes up a particular method of
production.

In the long run, firms can choose their production technology, and so
all costs become variable costs. In making this choice, firms will try
to substitute relatively inexpensive inputs for relatively expensive
inputs where possible, so as to produce at the lowest possible long-run
average cost.

Economies of scale refers to a situation where as the level of output
increases, the average cost decreases. Constant returns to scale refers
to a situation where average cost does not change as output increases.
Diseconomies of scale refers to a situation where as output increases,
average costs also increase.

The long-run average cost curve shows the lowest possible average cost
of production, allowing all the inputs to production to vary so that the
firm is choosing its production technology. A downward-sloping LRAC
shows economies of scale; a flat LRAC shows constant returns to scale;
an upward-sloping LRAC shows diseconomies of scale. If the long-run
average cost curve has only one quantity produced that results in the
lowest possible average cost, then all of the firms competing in an
industry should be the same size. However, if the LRAC has a flat
segment at the bottom, so that a firm can produce a range of different
quantities at the lowest average cost, the firms competing in the
industry will display a range of sizes. The market demand in conjunction
with the long-run average cost curve determines how many firms will
exist in a given industry.

If the quantity demanded in the market of a certain product is much
greater than the quantity found at the bottom of the long-run average
cost curve, where the cost of production is lowest, the market will have
many firms competing. If the quantity demanded in the market is less
than the quantity at the bottom of the LRAC, there will likely be only
one firm.
