## Self-Check Questions

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idm18450688-solution).

A firm had sales revenue of \$1 million last year. It spent \$600,000 on
labor, \$150,000 on capital and \$200,000 on materials. What was the
firm's accounting profit?

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idp12466368-solution).

Continuing from [Exercise 7.1](#fs-idm18450688), the firm's factory sits
on land owned by the firm that it could rent for \$30,000 per year. What
was the firm's economic profit last year?

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idm67487424-solution).

The WipeOut Ski Company manufactures skis for beginners. Fixed costs are
\$30. Fill in [Table 7.16](#Table_07_04) for total cost, average
variable cost, average total cost, and marginal cost.

Table 7.16

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idm78693232-solution).

Based on your answers to the WipeOut Ski Company in [Exercise
7.3](#fs-idm67487424), now imagine a situation where the firm produces a
quantity of 5 units that it sells for a price of \$25 each.

a.  What will be the company's profits or losses?
b.  How can you tell at a glance whether the company is making or losing
    money at this price by looking at average cost?
c.  At the given quantity and price, is the marginal unit produced
    adding to profits?

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#eip-561-solution).

If two painters can paint 200 square feet of wall in an hour, and three
painters can paint 275 square feet, what is the marginal product of the
third painter?

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idm79135792-solution).

Return to the problem explained in [Table
7.13](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/7-5-costs-in-the-long-run#Table_07_06)
and [Table
7.14](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/7-5-costs-in-the-long-run#Table_07_07).
If the cost of labor remains at \$40, but the cost of a machine
decreases to \$50, what would be the total cost of each method of
production? Which method should the firm use, and why?

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idm87728624-solution).

Suppose the cost of machines increases to \$55, while the cost of labor
stays at \$40. How would that affect the total cost of the three
methods? Which method should the firm choose now?

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/chapter-7#fs-idm73118336-solution).

Automobile manufacturing is an industry subject to significant economies
of scale. Suppose there are four domestic auto manufacturers, but the
demand for domestic autos is no more than 2.5 times the quantity
produced at the bottom of the long-run average cost curve. What do you
expect will happen to the domestic auto industry in the long run?
