## 8.3 Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Explain how entry and exit lead to zero profits in the long run
-   Discuss the long-run adjustment process

It is impossible to precisely define the line between the short run and
the long run with a stopwatch, or even with a calendar. It varies
according to the specific business. Therefore, the distinction between
the short run and the long run is more technical: in the short run,
firms cannot change the usage of fixed inputs, while in the long run,
the firm can adjust all factors of production.

In a competitive market, profits are a red cape that incites businesses
to charge. If a business is making a profit in the short run, it has an
incentive to expand existing factories or to build new ones. New firms
may start production, as well. When new firms enter the industry in
response to increased industry profits it is called entry.

Losses are the black thundercloud that causes businesses to flee. If a
business is making losses in the short run, it will either keep limping
along or just shut down, depending on whether its revenues are covering
its variable costs. But in the long run, firms that are facing losses
will cease production altogether. The long-run process of reducing
production in response to a sustained pattern of losses is called exit.
The following Clear It Up feature discusses where some of these losses
might come from, and the reasons why some firms go out of business.

### Clear It Up {#clear-it-up .Heading3Grey}

#### Why do firms cease to exist? {#why-do-firms-cease-to-exist .Heading4Grey}

Can we say anything about what causes a firm to exit an industry?
Profits are the measurement that determines whether a business stays
operating or not. Individuals start businesses with the purpose of
making profits. They invest their money, time, effort, and many other
resources to produce and sell something that they hope will give them
something in return. Unfortunately, not all businesses are successful,
and many new startups soon realize that their "business venture" must
eventually end.

In the model of perfectly competitive firms, those that consistently
cannot make money will "exit," which is a nice, bloodless word for a
more painful process. When a business fails, after all, workers lose
their jobs, investors lose their money, and owners and managers can lose
their dreams. Many businesses fail. The U.S. Small Business
Administration indicates that in 2011, 534,907 new firms \"entered,\"
and 575,691 firms failed.

Sometimes a business fails because of poor management or workers who are
not very productive, or because of tough domestic or foreign
competition. Businesses also fail from a variety of causes. For example,
conditions of demand and supply in the market may shift in an unexpected
way, so that the prices that a business charges for outputs fall or the
prices for inputs rise. With millions of businesses in the U.S. economy,
even a small fraction of them failing will affect many people---and
business failures can be very hard on the workers and managers directly
involved. However, from the standpoint of the overall economic system,
business exits are sometimes a necessary evil if a market-oriented
system is going to offer a flexible mechanism for satisfying customers,
keeping costs low, and inventing new products.

### How Entry and Exit Lead to Zero Profits in the Long Run

No perfectly competitive firm acting alone can affect the market price.
However, the combination of many firms entering or exiting the market
will affect overall supply in the market. In turn, a shift in supply for
the market as a whole will affect the market price. Entry and exit to
and from the market are the driving forces behind a process that, in the
long run, pushes the price down to minimum average total costs so that
all firms are earning a zero profit.

To understand how short-run profits for a perfectly competitive firm
will evaporate in the long run, imagine the following situation. The
market is in long-run equilibrium, where all firms earn zero economic
profits producing the output level where P = MR = MC and P = AC. No firm
has the incentive to enter or leave the market. Let's say that the
product's demand increases, and with that, the market price goes up. The
existing firms in the industry are now facing a higher price than
before, so they will increase production to the new output level where P
= MR = MC.

This will temporarily make the market price rise above the minimum point
on the average cost curve, and therefore, the existing firms in the
market will now be earning economic profits. However, these economic
profits attract other firms to enter the market. Entry of many new firms
causes the market supply curve to shift to the right. As the supply
curve shifts to the right, the market price starts decreasing, and with
that, economic profits fall for new and existing firms. As long as there
are still profits in the market, entry will continue to shift supply to
the right. This will stop whenever the market price is driven down to
the zero-profit level, where no firm is earning economic profits.

Short-run losses will fade away by reversing this process. Say that the
market is in long-run equilibrium. This time, instead, demand decreases,
and with that, the market price starts falling. The existing firms in
the industry are now facing a lower price than before, and as it will be
below the average cost curve, they will now be making economic losses.
Some firms will continue producing where the new P = MR = MC, as long as
they are able to cover their average variable costs. Some firms will
have to shut down immediately as they will not be able to cover their
average variable costs, and will then only incur their fixed costs,
minimizing their losses. Exit of many firms causes the market supply
curve to shift to the left. As the supply curve shifts to the left, the
market price starts rising, and economic losses start to be lower. This
process ends whenever the market price rises to the zero-profit level,
where the existing firms are no longer losing money and are at zero
profits again. Thus, while a perfectly competitive firm can earn profits
in the short run, in the long run the process of entry will push down
prices until they reach the zero-profit level. Conversely, while a
perfectly competitive firm may earn losses in the short run, firms will
not continually lose money. In the long run, firms making losses are
able to escape from their fixed costs, and their exit from the market
will push the price back up to the zero-profit level. In the long run,
this process of entry and exit will drive the price in perfectly
competitive markets to the zero-profit point at the bottom of the AC
curve, where marginal cost crosses average cost.

### The Long-Run Adjustment and Industry Types

Whenever there are expansions in an industry, costs of production for
the existing and new firms could either stay the same, increase, or even
decrease. Therefore, we can categorize an industry as being (1) a
constant-cost industry (as demand increases, the cost of production for
firms stays the same), (2) an increasing cost industry (as demand
increases, the cost of production for firms increases), or (3) a
decreasing cost industry (as demand increases the costs of production
for the firms decreases).

For a constant-cost industry, whenever there is an increase in market
demand and price, then the supply curve shifts to the right with new
firms' entry and stops at the point where the new long-run equilibrium
intersects at the same market price as before. This is the case of
constant returns to scale, which we discussed earlier in the chapter on
Production, Costs, and Industry Structure. However, why will costs
remain the same? In this type of industry, the supply curve is very
elastic. Firms can easily supply any quantity that consumers demand. In
addition, there is a perfectly elastic supply of inputs---firms can
easily increase their demand for employees, for example, with no
increase to wages. Tying in to our Bring it Home discussion, an
increased demand for ethanol in recent years has caused the demand for
corn to increase. Consequently, many farmers switched from growing wheat
to growing corn. Agricultural markets are generally good examples of
constant-cost industries.

For an increasing cost industry, as the market expands, the old and new
firms experience increases in their costs of production, which makes the
new zero-profit level intersect at a higher price than before. Here
companies may have to deal with limited inputs, such as skilled labor.
As the demand for these workers rises, wages rise and this increases the
cost of production for all firms. The industry supply curve in this type
of industry is more inelastic.

For a decreasing cost industry, as the market expands, the old and new
firms experience lower costs of production, which makes the new
zero-profit level intersect at a lower price than before. In this case,
the industry and all the firms in it are experiencing falling average
total costs. This can be due to an improvement in technology in the
entire industry or an increase in the education of employees. High-tech
industries may be a good example of a decreasing cost market.

[Figure 8.8](#CNX_Econ_C08_013) (a) presents the case of an adjustment
process in a constant-cost industry. Whenever there are output
expansions in this type of industry, the long-run outcome implies more
output produced at exactly the same original price. Note that supply was
able to increase to meet the increased demand. When we join the before
and after long-run equilibriums, the resulting line is the long run
supply (LRS) curve in perfectly competitive markets. In this case, it is
a flat curve. [Figure 8.8](#CNX_Econ_C08_013) (b) and [Figure
8.8](#CNX_Econ_C08_013) (c) present the cases for an increasing cost and
decreasing cost industry, respectively. For an increasing cost industry,
the LRS is upward sloping, while for a decreasing cost industry, the LRS
is downward sloping.

![](media/8-3-entry-and-exit-decisions-in-the-long-run_rId32.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="1.98in"}

Figure 8.8 Adjustment Process in a Constant-Cost Industry In (a), demand
increased and supply met it. Notice that the supply increase is equal to
the demand increase. The result is that the equilibrium price stays the
same as quantity sold increases. In (b), notice that sellers were not
able to increase supply as much as demand. Some inputs were scarce, or
wages were rising. The equilibrium price rises. In (c), sellers easily
increased supply in response to the demand increase. Here, new
technology or economies of scale caused the large increase in supply,
resulting in declining equilibrium price.
