## 8.4 Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets

### Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

-   Apply concepts of productive efficiency and allocative efficiency to
    perfectly competitive markets
-   Compare the model of perfect competition to real-world markets

When profit-maximizing firms in perfectly competitive markets combine
with utility-maximizing consumers, something remarkable happens: the
resulting quantities of outputs of goods and services demonstrate both
productive and allocative efficiency (terms that we first introduced in
([Choice in a World of
Scarcity](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/2-introduction-to-choice-in-a-world-of-scarcity))
.

Productive efficiency means producing without waste, so that the choice
is on the production possibility frontier. In the long run in a
perfectly competitive market, because of the process of entry and exit,
the price in the market is equal to the minimum of the long-run average
cost curve. In other words, firms produce and sell goods at the lowest
possible average cost.

Allocative efficiency means that among the points on the production
possibility frontier, the chosen point is socially preferred---at least
in a particular and specific sense. In a perfectly competitive market,
price will be equal to the marginal cost of production. Think about the
price that one pays for a good as a measure of the social benefit one
receives for that good; after all, willingness to pay conveys what the
good is worth to a buyer. Then think about the marginal cost of
producing the good as representing not just the cost for the firm, but
more broadly as the social cost of producing that good. When perfectly
competitive firms follow the rule that profits are maximized by
producing at the quantity where price is equal to marginal cost, they
are thus ensuring that the social benefits they receive from producing a
good are in line with the social costs of production.

To explore what economists mean by allocative efficiency, it is useful
to walk through an example. Begin by assuming that the market for
wholesale flowers is perfectly competitive, and so P = MC. Now, consider
what it would mean if firms in that market produced a lesser quantity of
flowers. At a lesser quantity, marginal costs will not yet have
increased as much, so that price will exceed marginal cost; that is, P
\> MC. In that situation, the benefit to society as a whole of producing
additional goods, as measured by the willingness of consumers to pay for
marginal units of a good, would be higher than the cost of the inputs of
labor and physical capital needed to produce the marginal good. In other
words, the gains to society as a whole from producing additional
marginal units will be greater than the costs.

Conversely, consider what it would mean if, compared to the level of
output at the allocatively efficient choice when P = MC, firms produced
a greater quantity of flowers. At a greater quantity, marginal costs of
production will have increased so that P \< MC. In that case, the
marginal costs of producing additional flowers is greater than the
benefit to society as measured by what people are willing to pay. For
society as a whole, since the costs are outstripping the benefits, it
will make sense to produce a lower quantity of such goods.

When perfectly competitive firms maximize their profits by producing the
quantity where P = MC, they also assure that the benefits to consumers
of what they are buying, as measured by the price they are willing to
pay, is equal to the costs to society of producing the marginal units,
as measured by the marginal costs the firm must pay---and thus that
allocative efficiency holds.

We should view the statements that a perfectly competitive market in the
long run will feature both productive and allocative efficiency with a
degree of skepticism about its truth. Remember, economists are using the
concept of "efficiency" in a particular and specific sense, not as a
synonym for "desirable in every way." For one thing, consumers' ability
to pay reflects the income distribution in a particular society. For
example, a person with a low income may not be able to purchase their
own car because they have insufficient income.

Perfect competition, in the long run, is a hypothetical benchmark. For
market structures such as monopoly, monopolistic competition, and
oligopoly, which are more frequently observed in the real world than
perfect competition, firms will not always produce at the minimum of
average cost, nor will they always set price equal to marginal cost.
Thus, these other competitive situations will not produce productive and
allocative efficiency.

Moreover, real-world markets include many issues that are assumed away
in the model of perfect competition, including pollution, inventions of
new technology, poverty which may make some people unable to pay for
basic necessities of life, government programs like national defense or
education, discrimination in labor markets, and buyers and sellers who
must deal with imperfect and unclear information. We explore these
issues in other chapters. However, the theoretical efficiency of perfect
competition does provide a useful benchmark for comparing the issues
that arise from these real-world problems.

### Bring It Home {#bring-it-home .Heading3Grey}

#### A Dime a Dozen {#a-dime-a-dozen .Heading4Grey}

A quick glance at [Table 8.12](#ch08mod04_tab01) reveals the dramatic
increase in North Dakota corn production---almost a tenfold increase
since 1972. Recent allocation of land to corn (as of mid-2019) is
estimated to have increased to more than 4 million acres. Taking into
consideration that corn typically yields two to three times as many
bushels per acre as wheat, it is obvious there has been a significant
increase in bushels of corn. Why the increase in corn acreage?
Converging prices.

Table 8.12 (Source: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service)

Historically, wheat prices have been higher than corn prices, offsetting
wheat's lower yield per acre. However, in recent years wheat and corn
prices have been converging. In April 2013, *Agweek* reported the gap
was just 71 cents per bushel. As the difference in price narrowed,
switching to the production of higher yield per acre of corn simply made
good business sense. Erik Younggren, president of the National
Association of Wheat Growers said in the *Agweek* article, "I don\'t
think we\'re going to see mile after mile of waving amber fields \[of
wheat\] anymore.\" (Until wheat prices rise, we will probably be seeing
field after field of tasseled corn.)
