## Key Concepts and Summary

### 8.1 Perfect Competition and Why It Matters

A perfectly competitive firm is a price taker, which means that it must
accept the equilibrium price at which it sells goods. If a perfectly
competitive firm attempts to charge even a tiny amount more than the
market price, it will be unable to make any sales. In a perfectly
competitive market there are thousands of sellers, easy entry, and
identical products. A short-run production period is when firms are
producing with some fixed inputs. Long-run equilibrium in a perfectly
competitive industry occurs after all firms have entered and exited the
industry and seller profits are driven to zero.

Perfect competition means that there are many sellers, there is easy
entry and exiting of firms, products are identical from one seller to
another, and sellers are price takers.

### 8.2 How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions

As a perfectly competitive firm produces a greater quantity of output,
its total revenue steadily increases at a constant rate determined by
the given market price. Profits will be highest (or losses will be
smallest) at the quantity of output where total revenues exceed total
costs by the greatest amount (or where total revenues fall short of
total costs by the smallest amount). Alternatively, profits will be
highest where marginal revenue, which is price for a perfectly
competitive firm, is equal to marginal cost. If the market price faced
by a perfectly competitive firm is above average cost at the
profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm is making profits.
If the market price is below average cost at the profit-maximizing
quantity of output, then the firm is making losses.

If the market price is equal to average cost at the profit-maximizing
level of output, then the firm is making zero profits. We call the point
where the marginal cost curve crosses the average cost curve, at the
minimum of the average cost curve, the "zero profit point." If the
market price that a perfectly competitive firm faces is below average
variable cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm
should shut down operations immediately. If the market price that a
perfectly competitive firm faces is above average variable cost, but
below average cost, then the firm should continue producing in the short
run, but exit in the long run. We call the point where the marginal cost
curve crosses the average variable cost curve the shutdown point.

### 8.3 Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run

In the long run, firms will respond to profits through a process of
entry, where existing firms expand output and new firms enter the
market. Conversely, firms will react to losses in the long run through a
process of exit, in which existing firms cease production altogether.
Through the process of entry in response to profits and exit in response
to losses, the price level in a perfectly competitive market will move
toward the zero-profit point, where the marginal cost curve crosses the
AC curve at the minimum of the average cost curve.

The long-run supply curve shows the long-run output supplied by firms in
three different types of industries: constant cost, increasing cost, and
decreasing cost.

### 8.4 Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets

Long-run equilibrium in perfectly competitive markets meets two
important conditions: allocative efficiency and productive efficiency.
These two conditions have important implications. First, resources are
allocated to their best alternative use. Second, they provide the
maximum satisfaction attainable by society.
