## Chapter 6

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/6-self-check-questions#fs-idp54001568).

The rows of the table in the problem do not represent the actual choices
available on the budget set; that is, the combinations of round trips
and phone minutes that Jeremy can afford with his budget. One of the
choices listed in the problem, the six round trips, is not even
available on the budget set. If Jeremy has only \$10 to spend and a
round trip costs \$2 and phone calls cost \$0.05 per minute, he could
spend his entire budget on five round trips but no phone calls or 200
minutes of phone calls, but no round trips or any combination of the two
in between. It is easy to see all of his budget options with a little
algebra. The equation for a budget line is:

![multiline equation row 1 Budget equals cap P sub RT postfix times cap
Q sub RT plus cap P sub PC times cap Q sub
PC](media/rId21.png){width="2.53125in" height="0.16666666666666666in"}

where P and Q are price and quantity of round trips (~RT~) and phone
calls (~PC~) (per minute). In Jeremy's case the equation for the budget
line is:

![multiline equation row 1 dollar sign 10 equals dollar sign two prefix
times cap Q sub RT plus dollar sign .05 prefix times cap Q sub PC row 2
dollar sign 10 divided by dollar sign .05 equals dollar sign two cap Q
sub RT prefix plus dollar sign .05 cap Q sub PC divided by dollar sign
.05 row 3 200 equals 40 cap Q sub RT prefix plus cap Q sub PC row 4 cap
Q sub PC equals 200 negative 40 cap Q sub
RT](media/rId23.png){width="2.3229166666666665in"
height="0.9270833333333334in"}

If we choose zero through five round trips (column 1), the table below
shows how many phone minutes can be afforded with the budget (column 3).
The total utility figures are given in the table below.

Adding up total utility for round trips and phone minutes at different
points on the budget line gives total utility at each point on the
budget line. The highest possible utility is at the combination of one
trip and 160 minutes of phone time, with a total utility of 1120.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/6-self-check-questions#fs-idp27417296).

The first step is to use the total utility figures, shown in the table
below, to calculate marginal utility, remembering that marginal utility
is equal to the change in total utility divided by the change in trips
or minutes.

Note that we cannot directly compare marginal utilities, since the units
are trips versus phone minutes. We need a common denominator for
comparison, which is price. Dividing MU by the price, yields columns 4
and 8 in the table below.

Start at the bottom of the table where the combination of round trips
and phone minutes is (5, 0). This starting point is arbitrary, but the
numbers in this example work best starting from the bottom. Suppose we
consider moving to the next point up. At (4, 40), the marginal utility
per dollar spent on a round trip is 25. The marginal utility per dollar
spent on phone minutes is 190.

Since 25 \< 190, we are getting much more utility per dollar spent on
phone minutes, so let's choose more of those. At (3, 80), MU/P~RT~ is 30
\< 150 (the MU/~PM~), but notice that the difference is narrowing. We
keep trading round trips for phone minutes until we get to (1, 160),
which is the best we can do. The MU/P comparison is as close as it is
going to get (40 vs. 70). Often in the real world, it is not possible to
get MU/P exactly equal for both products, so you get as close as you
can.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/6-self-check-questions#fs-idm101555216).

This is the opposite of the example explained in the text. A decrease in
price has a substitution effect and an income effect. The substitution
effect says that because the product is cheaper relative to other things
the consumer purchases, the consumer will tend to buy more of the
product (and less of the other things). The income effect says that
after the price decline, the consumer could purchase the same goods as
before, and still have money left over to purchase more. For both
reasons, a decrease in price causes an increase in quantity demanded.

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/6-self-check-questions#fs-idp49918640).

This is a negative income effect. Because your parents' check failed to
arrive, your monthly income is less than normal and your budget
constraint shifts in toward the origin. If you only buy normal goods,
the decrease in your income means you will buy less of every product.
