## Chapter 5

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp16086976).

From point B to point C, price rises from \$70 to \$80, and Qd decreases
from 2,800 to 2,600. So:

![multiline equation row 1 percent sign change in quantity equals 2600
en dash 2800 divided by left parenthesis 2600 plus 2800 right
parenthesis division sign two times times 100 row 2 Blank equals en dash
200 divided by 2700 times times 100 row 3 Blank equals en dash 7.41 row
4 percent sign change in price equals 80 en dash 70 divided by left
parenthesis 80 plus 70 right parenthesis division sign two times times
100 row 5 Blank equals 10 divided by 75 times times 100 row 6 Blank
equals 13.33 row 7 Elasticity of Demand equals en dash 7.41 percent sign
divided by 13.33 percent sign row 8 Blank equals
0.56](media/chapter-5_rId21.png){width="2.8854166666666665in"
height="2.0208333333333335in"}

The demand curve is inelastic in this area; that is, its elasticity
value is less than one.

Answer from Point D to point E:

![multiline equation row 1 percent sign change in quantity equals 2200
en dash 2400 divided by left parenthesis 2200 plus 2400 right
parenthesis division sign two times times 100 row 2 Blank equals en dash
200 divided by 2300 times times 100 row 3 Blank equals en dash 8.7 row 4
percent sign change in price equals 100 en dash 90 divided by left
parenthesis 100 plus 90 right parenthesis division sign two times times
100 row 5 Blank equals 10 divided by 95 times times 100 row 6 Blank
equals 10.53 row 7 Elasticity of Demand equals en dash 8.7 percent sign
divided by 10.53 percent sign row 8 Blank equals
0.83](media/chapter-5_rId23.png){width="2.8854166666666665in" height="2.03125in"}

The demand curve is inelastic in this area; that is, its elasticity
value is less than one.

Answer from Point G to point H:

![multiline equation row 1 percent sign change in quantity equals 1600
en dash 1800 divided by 1700 times times 100 row 2 Blank equals en dash
200 divided by 1700 times times 100 row 3 Blank equals en dash 11.76 row
4 percent sign change in price equals 130 en dash 120 divided by 125
times times 100 row 5 Blank equals 10 divided by 125 times times 100 row
6 Blank equals 8.00 row 7 Elasticity of Demand equals en dash 11.76
percent sign divided by 8.00 percent sign row 8 Blank equals en dash
1.47](media/chapter-5_rId25.png){width="2.6145833333333335in" height="1.96875in"}

The demand curve is elastic in this interval.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idm14629328).

From point J to point K, price rises from \$8 to \$9, and quantity rises
from 50 to 70. So:

![multiline equation row 1 percent sign change in quantity equals 70 en
dash 50 divided by left parenthesis 70 plus 50 right parenthesis
division sign two times times 100 row 2 Blank equals 20 divided by 60
times times 100 row 3 Blank equals 33.33 row 4 percent sign change in
price equals dollar sign nine en dash dollar sign eight divided by left
parenthesis dollar sign nine plus dollar sign eight right parenthesis
division sign two times times 100 row 5 Blank equals one divided by 8.5
times times 100 row 6 Blank equals 11.76 row 7 Elasticity of Supply
equals 33.33 percent sign divided by 11.76 percent sign row 8 Blank
equals 2.83](media/chapter-5_rId29.png){width="2.65625in" height="2.03125in"}

The supply curve is elastic in this area; that is, its elasticity value
is greater than one.

From point L to point M, the price rises from \$10 to \$11, while the Qs
rises from 80 to 88:

![multiline equation row 1 percent sign change in quantity equals 88 en
dash 80 divided by left parenthesis 88 plus 80 right parenthesis
division sign two times times 100 row 2 Blank equals eight divided by 84
times times 100 row 3 Blank equals 9.52 row 4 percent sign change in
price equals dollar sign 11 en dash dollar sign 10 divided by left
parenthesis dollar sign 11 plus dollar sign 10 right parenthesis
division sign two times times 100 row 5 Blank equals one divided by 10.5
times times 100 row 6 Blank equals 9.52 row 7 Elasticity of Demand
equals 9.52 percent sign divided by 9.52 percent sign row 8 Blank equals
1.0](media/chapter-5_rId31.png){width="2.7708333333333335in" height="2.03125in"}

The supply curve has unitary elasticity in this area.

From point N to point P, the price rises from \$12 to \$13, and Qs rises
from 95 to 100:

![multiline equation row 1 percent sign change in quantity equals 100 en
dash 95 divided by left parenthesis 100 plus 95 right parenthesis
division sign two times 100 row 2 Blank equals five divided by 97.5
times 100 row 3 Blank equals 5.13 row 4 percent sign change in price
equals dollar sign 13 en dash dollar sign 12 divided by left parenthesis
dollar sign 13 plus dollar sign 12 right parenthesis division sign two
times times 100 row 5 Blank equals one divided by 12.5 times times 100
row 6 Blank equals 8.0 row 7 Elasticity of Supply equals 5.13 percent
sign divided by 8.0 percent sign row 8 Blank equals
0.64](media/chapter-5_rId33.png){width="2.7708333333333335in" height="2.03125in"}

The supply curve is inelastic in this region of the supply curve.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp21610480).

The demand curve with constant unitary elasticity is concave because the
absolute value of declines in price are not identical. The left side of
the curve starts with high prices, and then price falls by smaller
amounts as it goes down toward the right side. This results in a slope
of demand that is steeper on the left but flatter on the right, creating
a curved, concave shape.

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp15543856).

The constant unitary elasticity is a straight line because the curve
slopes upward and both price and quantity are increasing proportionally.

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp52211440).

Carmakers can pass this cost along to consumers if the demand for these
cars is inelastic. If the demand for these cars is elastic, then the
manufacturer must pay for the equipment.

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp1495344).

If the elasticity is 1.4 at current prices, you would advise the company
to lower its price on the product, since a decrease in price will be
offset by the increase in the amount of the drug sold. If the elasticity
were 0.6, then you would advise the company to increase its price.
Increases in price will offset the decrease in number of units sold, but
increase your total revenue. If elasticity is 1, the total revenue is
already maximized, and you would advise that the company maintain its
current price level.

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp34138144).

The percentage change in quantity supplied as a result of a given
percentage change in the price of gasoline.

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp23662496).

![multiline equation row 1 Percentage change in quantity demanded equals
left bracket left parenthesis change in quantity right parenthesis slash
left parenthesis original quantity right parenthesis right bracket times
100 row 2 Blank equals left bracket 22 en dash 30 right bracket slash
left bracket left parenthesis 22 plus 30 right parenthesis slash two
right bracket times 100 row 3 Blank equals en dash eight slash 26 times
100 row 4 Blank equals en dash 30.77 row 5 Percentage change in income
equals left bracket left parenthesis change in income right parenthesis
slash left parenthesis original income right parenthesis right bracket
times 100 row 6 Blank equals left bracket 38,000 en dash 25,000 right
bracket slash left bracket left parenthesis 38,000 plus 25,000 right
parenthesis slash two right bracket times 100 row 7 Blank equals 13
slash 31.5 times 100 row 8 Blank equals
41.27](media/chapter-5_rId47.png){width="6.395833333333333in"
height="1.7708333333333333in"}

In this example, bread is an inferior good because its consumption falls
as income rises.

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/5-self-check-questions#fs-idp23027184).

The formula for cross-price elasticity is % change in Qd for apples / %
change in P of oranges. Multiplying both sides by % change in P of
oranges yields:

\% change in Qd for apples = cross-price elasticity X% change in P of
oranges

= 0.4 Ã— (--3%) = --1.2%, or a 1.2 % decrease in demand for apples.
