## Chapter 1

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idp29324864).

Scarcity means human wants for goods and services exceed the available
supply. Supply is limited because resources are limited. Demand,
however, is virtually unlimited. Whatever the supply, it seems human
nature to want more.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idp17722592).

100 people / 10 people per ham = a maximum of 10 hams per month if all
residents produce ham. Since consumption is limited by production, the
maximum number of hams residents could consume per month is 10.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idm44213984).

She is very productive at her consulting job, but not very productive
growing vegetables. Time spent consulting would produce far more income
than it what she could save growing her vegetables using the same amount
of time. So on purely economic grounds, it makes more sense for her to
maximize her income by applying her labor to what she does best (i.e.
specialization of labor).

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idm9204768).

The engineer is better at computer science than at painting. Thus, his
time is better spent working for pay at his job and paying a painter to
paint his house. Of course, this assumes he does not paint his house for
fun!

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idp114519664).

There are many physical systems that would work, for example, the study
of planets (micro) in the solar system (macro), or solar systems (micro)
in the galaxy (macro).

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idp45666752).

Draw a box outside the original circular flow to represent the foreign
country. Draw an arrow from the foreign country to firms, to represents
imports. Draw an arrow in the reverse direction representing payments
for imports. Draw an arrow from firms to the foreign country to
represent exports. Draw an arrow in the reverse direction to represent
payments for imports.

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idp29826816).

There are many such problems. Consider the AIDS epidemic. Why are so few
AIDS patients in Africa and Southeast Asia treated with the same drugs
that are effective in the United States and Europe? It is because
neither those patients nor the countries in which they live have the
resources to purchase the same drugs.

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idm62491568).

Public enterprise means the factors of production (resources and
businesses) are owned and operated by the government.

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/1-self-check-questions#fs-idm186615616).

The United States is a large country economically speaking, so it has
less need to trade internationally than the other countries mentioned.
(This is the same reason that France and Italy have lower ratios than
Belgium or Sweden.) One additional reason is that each of the other
countries is a member of the European Union, where trade between members
occurs without barriers to trade, like tariffs and quotas.
