## Chapter 20

[1](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm84908672).

This is the opposite case of the Work It Out feature. A reduced tariff
is like a decrease in the cost of production, which is shown by a
downward (or rightward) shift in the supply curve.

[2](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idp4521984).

A subsidy is like a reduction in cost. This shifts the supply curve down
(or to the right), driving the price of sugar down. If the subsidy is
large enough, the price of sugar can fall below the cost of production
faced by foreign producers, which means they will lose money on any
sugar they produce and sell.

[3](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm98979792).

Trade barriers raise the price of goods in protected industries. If
those products are inputs in other industries, it raises their
production costs and then prices, so sales fall in those other
industries. Lower sales lead to lower employment. Additionally, if the
protected industries are consumer goods, their customers pay higher
prices, which reduce demand for other consumer products and thus
employment in those industries.

[4](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm28666880).

Trade based on comparative advantage raises the average wage rate
economy-wide, though it can reduce the incomes of import-substituting
industries. By moving away from a country's comparative advantage, trade
barriers do the opposite: they give workers in protected industries an
advantage, while reducing the average wage economy-wide.

[5](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idp7397200).

By raising incomes, trade tends to raise working conditions also, even
though those conditions may not (yet) be equivalent to those in
high-income countries.

[6](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm109502416).

They typically pay more than the next-best alternative. If a Nike firm
did not pay workers at least as much as they would earn, for example, in
a subsistence rural lifestyle, they many never come to work for Nike.

[7](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idp33287152).

Since trade barriers raise prices, real incomes fall. The average worker
would also earn less.

[8](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm66227568).

Workers working in other sectors and the protected sector see a decrease
in their real wage.

[9](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idp111414224).

If imports can be sold at extremely low prices, domestic firms would
have to match those prices to be competitive. By definition, matching
prices would imply selling under cost and, therefore, losing money.
Firms cannot sustain losses forever. When they leave the industry,
importers can "take over," raising prices to monopoly levels to cover
their short-term losses and earn long-term profits.

[10](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idp22929616).

Because low-income countries need to provide necessities---food,
clothing, and shelter---to their people. In other words, they consider
environmental quality a luxury.

[11](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idp41927136).

Low-income countries can compete for jobs by reducing their
environmental standards to attract business to their countries. This
could lead to a competitive reduction in regulations, which would lead
to greater environmental damage. While pollution management is a cost
for businesses, it is tiny relative to other costs, like labor and
adequate infrastructure. It is also costly for firms to locate far away
from their customers, which many low-income countries are.

[12](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm25520848).

The decision should not be arbitrary or unnecessarily discriminatory. It
should treat foreign companies the same way as domestic companies. It
should be based on science.

[13](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm9931232).

Restricting imports today does not solve the problem. If anything, it
makes it worse since it implies using up domestic sources of the
products faster than if they are imported. Also, the national security
argument can be used to support protection of nearly any product, not
just things critical to our national security.

[14](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm106000144).

The effect of increasing standards may increase costs to the small
exporting country. The supply curve of toys will shift to the left.
Exports will decrease and toy prices will rise. Tariffs also raise
prices. So the effect on the price of toys is the same. A tariff is a
"second best" policy and also affects other sectors. However, a common
standard across countries is a "first best" policy that attacks the
problem at its root.

[15](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm85088304).

A free trade association offers free trade between its members, but each
country can determine its own trade policy outside the association. A
common market requires a common external trade policy in addition to
free trade within the group. An economic union is a common market with
coordinated fiscal and monetary policy.

[16](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm70234560).

International agreements can serve as a political counterweight to
domestic special interests, thereby preventing stronger protectionist
measures.

[17](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm125679440).

Reductions in tariffs, quotas, and other trade barriers, improved
transportation, and communication media have made people more aware of
what is available in the rest of the world.

[18](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm150665440).

Competition from firms with better or cheaper products can reduce a
business's profits, and may drive it out of business. Workers would
similarly lose income or even their jobs.

[19](http://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/20-self-check-questions#fs-idm132633744).

Consumers get better or less expensive products. Businesses with the
better or cheaper products increase their profits. Employees of those
businesses earn more income. On balance, the gains outweigh the losses
to a nation.
